All right. This is the episode of my
roommate teaches me semiconductors.
[laughter]
>> It's also the sendoff for this uh this
current set.
>> It's Yeah, you're you know, after you
use it, I'm like, I can't use this
again.
>> I got to get out of here.
>> Those sloppy seconds for dork.
>> Yes. [laughter]
>> Okay. Dylan is the uh CEO of semi
analysis. Dylan, the vering question I
have for you. Um if you add up the big
four, Amazon, Meta, Google, Microsoft,
their combined uh forecasted capex that
you published recently this year is $600
billion. And given uh you know yearly
prices of renting that compute, that
would be like close to 50 gawatt. Now
obviously we're not putting on 50 gawatt
this year. So presumably that's paying
for compute that is going to be coming
online over the coming years. So I have
a question about what how to think about
the timeline around when that capex
comes online. Similar question for the
labs where you know OpenAI just
announced that they raise $110 billion.
Anthropic just announced they raised $30
billion and if you look at the compute
that they have coming online this year
um you should tell me how much it is but
like isn't another 4 gawatt total that
they'll have this year. It feels like
the cost to rent the compute that OpenAI
and Enthropic will have this year to
like sustain their comput spend at you
know 101 13 billion a gigawatt
those individual raises alone are like
enough to cover their comput spend for
the year and then this is not even
including the revenue that they're going
to earn this year. So help me understand
first when is the time scale at which
the big tech capex is actually coming
online and two what are the labs raising
all this money for if like the the
yearly price of a a 1 gawatt data center
is like $1 13 billion.
>> So when you talk about the capex of
these hyperscalers right on the order of
$600 billion and you look at across the
rest of the supply chain gets you to on
the order of a trillion dollars. A
portion of this is you know immediately
for compute going online this year right
the chips and the uh the the other parts
of capex that do get paid this year but
there's a lot of setup capex as well
right so when we have when we're talking
about 20 gawatt this year in America
roughly
>> incremental
>> incremental added capacity a portion of
this is not spent this year a portion of
that capex is actually spent the prior
year and so when you look at hey
Google's got $180 billion actually big
chunk of that is spent on turbine
deposits for 28 and 29. A chunk of that
is spent on data center construction for
27. A chunk of that is spent on, you
know, power purchasing agreements and
down payments and all these other things
that they're doing uh for further out
into the future so that they can set up
this super fast scaling, right? And and
and this applies to all the hyperscalers
and other people in the supply chain.
And so, you know, 20 gigawatts roughly
deployed this year. Um a big chunk of
that being hyperscalers, chunk not being
and all of these companies, their
biggest customers are Anthropic and
OpenAI. um anthropic and open AAI are in
the you know 2 gawatt and you know 2 and
a half gawatt and one and a half
gigawatts roughly right now they're
trying to scale to much larger right if
you look at what anthropic has done over
the last few months you know 4 billion 6
billion revenue added and if we just
draw a straight line hey yeah they'll
add another $6 billion of revenue a
month uh people would argue that's
bearish and that they should go faster
what that implies is that they're going
to add $60 billion of revenue across the
next 10 months right and $60 billion of
revenue at the current gross margins
that Anthropic had at least last uh
reported by media um would imply that
they have you know roughly $40 billion
of compute spend for that inference for
that 60 bill of revenue. That $40
billion of compute at roughly $10
billion a gigawatt um rental cost means
that they need to add 4 gawatt of
inference capacity just to grow revenue
and that's saying that their research
and development training fleet stays
flat. Right? So, you know, in a sense,
Enthropic needs to get to well above 5
gigawatts by the end of this year, and
it's going to be really tough for them
to get there, but it's possible.
>> Can can I ask a question about that? So,
yeah. Um,
>> if Enthropic was not on track to have 5
gigawatts by the end end of this year,
but it needs that to serve both the
revenue that's gone crazier than
expected and maybe it's going to be even
more than that, plus the research and
training to make sure its models are
good enough for next year. How how where
is that going to come from? You know,
Dario when he was on your podcast was
very very like conservative. He's like,
you know, I'm not going to go crazy on
compute because if my revenue in flex at
a different rate, at a different point,
I don't want to go bankrupt. You know, I
want to make sure that we're being
responsible with this scaling. But in
reality, you know, he's definitely
missed the pooch in terms of like going
like OpenAI, which was let's just sign
these crazy [__] deals, right? Um,
and OpenAI is kind of got way more
access to compute than Enthropic by the
end of the year. And so what does
Enthropic have to do to get the compute?
Well, they have to go to lower quality
providers that they would not have gone
to before, right? You know, optimally,
you know, Anthropic at least
historically has had the best quality
providers been like Google and Amazon.
Um whereas, you know, at least
historically minded, you know, the
biggest companies in the world, um now
Microsoft and now they're expanding
across the supply chain and going to
other players that are newer. Um Open
Alia has been, you know, a bit more
aggressive on going to many players.
Yes, they have tons of capacity from
Microsoft. uh they have Google and
Amazon as well, but they also have like
tons with Cororeweave and Oracle and
they've gone to like random companies or
you know one would think random
companies like SoftBank Energy who has
never built a data center in their life
but you know they're building data
centers now for OpenAI. So they've gone
to and and and many others like Nscale
and others um that they're going and
getting capacity from. And so there's
this like conundrum for Anthropic
because they were so conservative on
compute um because they didn't want to
go crazy, right? And oh, in in some
sense, a lot of the financial freakouts
in the second half of last year were
like open signed all these deals, but
they don't have the money to pay for
them. Um okay, Oracle stock's going to
tank. Oh, okay. Core reef stock's going
to tank. Okay, like you know, all these
compan stocks tanked. Um and credit
markets went crazy because people were
like, the end buyer can't pay for this.
Now it's like, oh wait, they raised a
ton of money. Okay, fine. They can pay
for it. But in the sense, Anthropic was
a lot more conservative. They're like,
we'll sign contracts, but we'll be
principled um and we'll purposely
undershoot what we think we can possibly
do um and be conservative because we
don't want to potentially go bankrupt.
>> But the thing I want to understand is so
in a what what is it mean to have to
acquire compute in a pinch? Um is it
that you have to go with like NeoClouds
that is it that they have worse compute
or like in what way is it worse? Is it
that you had to pay gross margins to a
cloud provider that you wouldn't have
otherwise had to pay to because you're
coming in at the last minute? Who built
the spare capacity such that it's
available for Enthropic and OpenAI to
get last minute? And like basically what
is the concrete advantage that OpenAI
has gotten if they end up at similar
compute numbers by 2027? Um is it just
like they're going to end this year with
different gigawatts? If so, how many
gigawatts is Enthropic and Open AI going
to have by the end of this year?
>> Yeah. So to to acquire excess compute I
mean yes there is capacity at
hyperscalers that um and not all
contracts for compute are long-term
right 5 years right there's compute that
in 2023 or 2024 H100 2025 that were
signed at not 5-year deals right open
eye the vast majority of their compute
is signed at 5-year deals but they can
you know there were there were many
other customers that had one year two
year threeear deals six-month deals on
demand and as these contracts roll off
who is the participant in the get most
willing to pay price. Um, and in this
sense, right, we've seen H100 prices
inflect a lot and go up and people
willing to sign long-term deals for, you
know, as above $2 even, right? Like I've
seen deals where certain AI labs, I'm be
a little bit uh vague here for a reason,
uh, have signed [clears throat] at as
high as $2.40 40s for two to three years
for H100's which if you think about the
margin $140 for Hopper when you release
it uh or Hopper to build it um across 5
years and now 2 years in you're signing
deals that are two to three years that
are at $2.40 40 cents those margins are
way higher right and so now you can
crowd out all of these other suppliers
whether it's Amazon had these or core
we've had these or together AI or Nebius
or whoever it is right you know the the
these these neoclouds
are the firms that had a higher
percentage of Hopper in general because
they were more aggressive on it a and b
they tended to sign shorter term deals
you know not cor but the others tended
to sign shorter term deals and so Hey,
if I want Hopper, there is some capacity
out there. And then also, while most of
the capacity at like an Oracle or a
Cororeweave is signed for a long-term
deal in terms of Blackwell, uh, anything
that's going online this quarter is
already sold. Um, and and in some cases,
they're not even hitting all the numbers
that they promised they would sell
because there's some data center delays.
Not just those two but like Nebius and
all the other folks Microsoft, Amazon,
Google but there is a lot of NeoClouds
as well as some of the hyperscalers who
have capacity they're building that they
did not sell yet or capacity that they
were going to allocate to some internal
use uh that is not necessarily super a
AGI focused that they may now turn
around and sell or they may you know in
the case of Anthropic they don't have to
have all the compute directly right
Amazon can have the compute they can
serve Bedrock or Google can have the
compute and serve Vertex or Microsoft
can have the compute and serve Foundry
and then do a revenue share within
Enthropic or vice versa.
>> Basically, you're saying Enthropic is
having to pay either this like 50%
markup in the sense of the revenue share
or in the sense of last minute spot
compute that they wouldn't have
otherwise had to pay had they bought the
compute early,
>> right? And and you know there's a
trade-off there. Uh but also at the same
time um you know for a solid like 4
months everyone was like open we're not
going to sign deals with you. Like that
sounds crazy right because you guys
don't have the money. Now everyone's
like yeah open we believed you the whole
time. we can we can sign any deal
because you've raised all this money. Um
but in a sense anthropic is constrained
in that sense. Um there are not that
many incremental buyers of compute yet
because anthropic hit the capabilities
tier first where their revenues. That's
interesting like that that's this you
know because otherwise we're like well
having the best model is a extremely
depreciating asset that you know 3
months later or you don't have the best
model but like the reason it's important
is that you can sign these deals and
then lock in the compute in advance get
better prices. Um doesn't this also
imply by the way and maybe this is an
obvious point but there's at least until
recently people had made this huge point
about oh what is the depreciation cycle
of a GPU and the bears Michael Bur or
whatever have said look people are
saying that four or five years for these
GPUs and in fact if you maybe it's
because the technology is improving so
fast or whatever it might make sense to
have two-year depreciation cycles for
these GPUs which increases the sort of
like reported amortized capex in a given
year. Uh and so makes it maybe
financially less lucrative to building
all these clouds. But in fact, you're
pointing at like maybe the depreciation
cycle is even longer than 5 years
because if we're using hoppers and then
especially if AI really takes off and in
2030 we're like [__] we got to like get
the 7 nanometer fabs up and we got to
like we got to go back to the A100s like
turn on the A100s again. Uh then it's
like actually the depreciation cycle is
incredibly long and um uh so I feel like
that's an interesting financial
implication of what you're saying.
>> There's a few um strings to pull on
there. One is um what happens to
depreciation of GPUs, right? Um and and
I guess I didn't answer your prior
question which is like Enthropic
>> I think will be able to get to like 5
gawattsish maybe a little bit more by
the end of the year through themselves
as well as their product being served
>> through Bedrock or through Vert.Ex or
through Foundry. Uh I think they'll be
able to get to five or six gigawatts. Uh
which is way above their like initial
plans, right? um you know and and
anyways that's that's sort of like and
and an opening eye will be a little
roughly the same maybe a little higher
um actually a little bit higher based on
our numbers but anyways the depreciation
cycle of a GPU right Michael Bur was
saying it's you know three years or or
less right is like sort of his argument
and there's sort of two ways in lenses
to look at this like mechanically um in
in in this you know there's a TCO model
right uh total cost of ownership of a
GPU where we sort of project pricing out
for GPUs and uh build up the total cost
of a cluster. But there's a number of
costs, right? There's your data center
cost, right? Um there's your networking
cost. There's your hand smart hands and
people in the data center swapping stuff
out. There's your spare parts, right?
There's your actual chip cost. There's
your server cost. All these all these
various costs gets lumped together and
there's some depreciation cycles on it.
You know, there's certain credit costs
on it. Um and you get to okay, that's
how you build up. Hey, an H100 cost $140
an hour to deploy at volume across 5
years if your depreciation is 5 years.
And then if you sign a do a deal at $2
an hour for those five years, your gross
margin is roughly 35%. It's a little bit
above that, but you know, if you sign it
for $1.90, it's 35% roughly. Um, and
then at you assume at that fifth year,
the GPU falls off a bus, right? It's
dead. Um, and in some cases, you know,
sort of the argument people are making
is, well, if you didn't sign a long-term
deal because every two years, Nvidia's
tripling, quadrupling the performance
while only 2xing the price or 50%
increasing the price, then the price of
an H100, sure, maybe the value in the
market was $2 at 35% gross margins um,
in 2024, but in 2026 when Blackwell is
in super high volume and deploying
millions a year, you're actually now
worth a dollar an hour. And when Ruben
in 27 is in super high volume, right?
Even though it starts shipping this
year, isn't super high volume next year,
um, doing millions of chips a year, uh,
deployed into clouds, uh, you've got
another 3x in performance and another
50% or 2x in price. Actually, the hopper
is only worth 70 cents an hour. Um, and
so the price of a GPU would continue to
fall. That's like one lens. The other
lens is what is the utility you get out
of the chip, right? Because if you could
build infinite Reuben or infinite um of
the newest chip, then yes, that's
exactly what would happen. The price of
a hopper would fall um at a spot or a
short-term contract rate uh as the new
chips come out and the per price
performance goes up. But because you are
so limited on semiconductors um and
deployment timelines and all these
things, you end up with actually what
prices these chips is not, hey, what's
the comparative thing I can buy today?
it's actually what is the value I can
derive out of this chip today right and
in that sense
>> um let's take GPT 5.4 GP 5.4 4 is both
way cheaper to run than GP4. Uh has
fewer active parameters. Um it's it's
much smaller, right, in that sense of
active parameters plus because it's a
you know a sparere versus GP4 being a
coarser. Um there's also been so many
other advancements in training RL uh
model architecture etc etc data
qualities um all these things that have
made GPD 5.4 way better than GPD4 and
it's cheaper to serve. And so when you
look at an H100, it can serve more
tokens per GPU of 5.4 than if you had
ran GPD4 on it. Right? So, so at some
sense it's producing more tokens of a
model that is of higher quality. And so
>> in some sense, you know, obviously GP4,
what is the maximum TAM for its tokens?
You know, maybe maybe it was a few
billion, maybe it was tens of billions
of dollars. Adoption takes time. For GP
5.4 before that number is probably north
of 100 billion but there's an adoption
lag and there's competition so other
people are getting it and there's the
constant improvements that everyone else
is having so if if improvement stopped
you know here the value of an H100 is
now predicated on the value that GPD 5.4
four can get out of it instead of the
value that GP4 can get out of it and the
margins and all that stuff that these
labs are doing and they're in a
competitive environment so their margins
can't go to infinity. Um so you sort of
have this like dynamic that is quite
interesting in that an H100 is worth
more today than it was 3 years ago.
>> That's crazy. And I mean it's also
interesting from the perspective of like
just take that forward if you if we had
actual AGI models developed. If we had
like genuinely human on a server and a
human like on a flop basis an H100 these
are such handwavy numbers about how many
flops can the brain do but on a flop
basis an H100 is estimated to one E15 is
like how much some people estimate the
human brain does in flops. Um obviously
in terms of memory the human brain has
way more. H100 is like 80 gigabytes and
brain might have pabytes.
>> Oh yeah, you've got pabytes. [laughter]
Name name a pedabyte of ones and zeros,
bro. Name me a string.
>> Well, this is actually the point where
like actually in
>> No, we've just got the best sparse
attention techniques ever.
>> Genuinely, right? Like like in the sort
of like amount of information that is
compressed, it might be pabytes, but
like the actual like this, you know,
it's like extremely sparse. Um, but
anyways, imagine if we had a human
knowledge worker can produce six figures
a year of value. And so if a H100 can
produce something close to that, if we
had actual humans on a server, uh, the
value of an H100 is like it can repay
itself in the course of like a couple of
months. So, as I've been going through
everything to prep for taxes, I realized
that I worked with over 50 different
contractors last year, from
cinematographers to audio technicians to
editors, and I owed all of them 1099s.
In the past, I've just used a
spreadsheet and a big folder of invoices
to figure out who I need to collect tax
forms from. But with so many
contractors, this takes a bunch of time,
and I've almost missed some people. This
year though, Mercury made my process way
more straightforward. Whenever I paid
somebody in 2025, I just hit a toggle to
have Mercury request a W9 from them.
Because of that, everything that I
needed to issue 1099s got sent directly
to Mercury. I literally just clicked a
button and Mercury generated and sent
them all out. This is just one of the
many things that I never would have
assumed that a banking platform could
just handle for me. Mercury has a bunch
of features like this which are going to
collectively save me multiple days this
tax season. You can learn more at
mercury.com.
Mercury is a fintech company, not an
FDIC insured bank. Banking services
provided through Choice Financial Group
and column NA members FDIC. So when I
interviewed Dario, um the point I was
trying to make is not that I think the
singularity is two years away and
therefore Dario desperately needs to buy
more compute, although it's the revenue
is certainly there that he needs to buy
more comput. But the point I was trying
to make is that given what Daario seems
to be saying, given his statements that
we're two years away from a data center
of geniuses, um certainly not more than
5 years away and a data center of
geniuses should be earning trillions
upon trillions of dollars of revenue. It
just does not make sense why he keeps
making these statements about being more
conservative on comput or to your point
buying being less aggressive than open
AAI on compute. Um, and I I guess that
point got lost because then people were
like roasting me about like oh this
podcast was like trying to convince this
like [laughter] multi00 billion company
CEO like why don't you yolo it bro? But
no, I was trying to say that is
internally his uh statements are
inconsistent. Um uh anyway so it's it's
good to iron it out. Yeah, I think you
know going back to like sort of the
earlier view that if the models are so
powerful uh the value of a GPU goes up
over time
>> as we approach closer and closer to you
know let's say a point where right now
only openthropic have that viewpoint as
we approach further and further out
actually everyone is going to even with
open source models be able to like sort
of like start to uh see that value
skyrocket per GPU and so in that sense
you should you should commit now to
compute
But
interestingly in like in anthropic
fashion, right? Um you know there there
there's a bit of a meme that they are uh
they don't they have problems with
commitment issues and they're like sort
of polyamorous. So [laughter]
not Dario, but like this is a bit of a
meme. [laughter]
>> Explains everything. Um by the way so
there's this interesting economics
effect called alken Allen which is the
idea that if you increase the fixed cost
of different goods one of which is
higher quality and which is lower
quality that will make people choose the
higher quality good on the margin. So to
give a specific example suppose the you
know better tasting apple cost $2 and
then like the shittier apple apple cost
$1. Okay. Okay. Now, suppose you put an
import tariff on them and so now uh now
it's $3 versus it's $2 for like great
apple, medium apple, right?
>> Is that because they both increase by a
dollar or should it be like 50%
increase?
>> No. No. Because if they both increase by
a dollar, the the whole effect is that
if there's a fixed cost of supply to
both the relative price, the price
difference between them, um the ratio
changes. So, previously it was like this
the more expensive one was 2x more
expensive. Now it's just 1.5x more
expensive. Mhm.
>> So I wonder if applied to AI that would
mean that look if um if GPUs are going
to get more expensive there will be a
fixed cost increase in the price of
compute.
>> Yes.
>> As a result that will push people to be
willing to pay higher margins to for
slightly better models because the
calculus is I'm going to be paying all
this money for the compute anyways. I
might as well just pay slightly more to
making sure it's like the very best
model rather than a model that's
slightly worse.
>> Right? All right. So, the hopper went
from $2 to $3. And if a hopper can make
a million tokens of opus and it can make
2 million tokens of sonnet, um the price
differential between opus and sonnet has
decreased um because the price of the
GPU has increased by a dollar from 23.
Um interesting.
>> I think that makes a ton of sense. Also,
I think we just see all of the volumes
are on the best models today. all the
revenues on the best models today. And
in a compute limited world, um there's
sort of two things that happen, right? A
companies that have locked up, you know,
and and don't have commitment issues,
you know, have these 5-year contracts
for compute, they've kind of locked in a
humongous margin advantage because
they've locked in compute for 5 years at
a price of what it transacted at 5 years
ago or three years ago or two years ago,
whatever it is. Whereas, if you're now
three years into that five-year contract
and someone else's two-year contract or
three-year contract rolled off and now
you're trying to buy that at, you know,
modern pricing, when you're priced to
the value of models, the price is going
to be up a lot more. Um, and so in a
sense, like the person who committed
early has better margins in general. Um,
and the percentage of the market that is
in long-term contracts is much larger
than the percentage of the market in
short-term contracts that can be this
sort of flex capacity that you add at
the last second. and and at the same
time right um so where does the margin
go right uh because models get more
valuable um how much can the cloud
players flex their pricing well if in
fact like if you look at core weave
their average term duration is like over
three years right now um for like 90%
plus of their compute it's over three
years um and so they end up with this
like conundrum of like well they can't
actually flex price but every year
they're adding incrementally way more
capacity than they had previously
um this year alone is capacity
fleet of computers for all purposes for
serving WhatsApp and Instagram and
Facebook in 2022 and doing AI right um
they're adding that alone this year so
in the same sense you know you talk
about Meta's doing that cororeweave and
and Google and Amazon all these
companies are adding insane amounts of
compute year on year on year that new
compute gets transacted at the new price
um so in a sense yes you've locked in as
long as we're in a sort of a takeoff
off, right? Oh, open went from 600
megawatts to 2 gigawatts last year and
from 2 gawatt to, you know, 6 plus this
year and, you know, 6 to 12 next year,
right? The incremental added compute is
where all the cost is, not the prior
long-term contracts. So then who holds
the card is the infra providers for
charging margin, right? So now the cloud
players, the Neoclouds or the
hyperscalers can charge the margin. Oh,
they can't because um or they can to
some extent, but then as you go upstream
to oh well, who has access to all the
memory and logic capacity? Well, it's
it's Nvidia for the most part. They've
signed a lot of long-term contracts. Um,
you know, they've got like $90 billion
of long-term contracts today, and
they're negotiating three-year deals
with the memory vendors today. Um, you
know, you've got you've got, you know,
obviously Amazon and Google through
Broadcom and their, you know, Amazon
directly and all these companies, sort
of AMD, these companies hold all the
cards because they've secured the
capacity. Um, and and TSMC is not
raising prices, but memory vendors are
just like sort of to some extent raising
a lot of price, right? So, they're going
to double or triple price again. Uh but
then they're also signing these
long-term deals. So who is able to
recruit all the margin dollars is
actually, you know, potentially the
cloud, potentially the chip vendors, um
and the memory vendors. Um until TSMC or
ASML like break out and they're like,
"No, actually we're going to charge a
lot more." Um but at the same time, do
the model vendors get to charge crazy
margins? Um I think at least this year
we're going to see margins for the model
vendors go up a lot, right? Because
they're so capacity constrained, they
have to demand destroy demand, right?
there is there's no way they can
continue anthropic can continue at the
current pace without destroying demand.
>> Yeah. Uh let's get into logic and
memory. Um
how specifically Nvidia has been able to
lock up so much of both. So if you I
think according to your numbers by 27
Nvidia is going to have like 70 plus% of
N3 wafer capacity or something like
that. um uh or around that area and then
I I forget what the numbers were for
memory at SK Highex and Samsung and so
forth but um if you look at so think
about how the Neocloud business works
and how Nvidia works with that or how
the uh RL environment business works and
how anthropic works with that in both
those cases Nvidia is purposely trying
to fracture the complimentary industry
to make sure that they have as much
leverage as possible so they're giving
you know allocation to random neoclouds
to make sure that there's not one person
that has all the compute. Similarly,
Anthropic or OpenAI when they're working
with the data providers, they say no,
we're going to just seed a huge industry
of these things so that um we're not
locked into any one supplier for uh for
data environments. And I wonder why on
the 3 nanometer process that's going to
be tranium 3, that's going to be TPU v7
uh other accelerators potentially. And
why is TSMC just giving it all up to
Nvidia rather than, you know, trying to
fracture the market?
>> Yeah. So I think um there's a couple
like points here right um on 3nometer
you know if we go back to last year the
vast majority of 3nanometer was Apple
right Apple's being moved to 2nmter
memory prices are going up so Apple's
volumes may go down right because as
memory prices go up they have to either
they cut margin or they uh move move on
you know there there's some time lag
because they have long-term contracts
but basically Apple likely reduces
demand slash moves to 2nmter faster
where 2nometer is only capable sort of
mobile chips today um and in the future
AI chips will move there. So sort of
Apple has that and then Apple's also
talking to uh third party vendors
because they're getting squeezed out of
TSMC a little bit um because TSMC's
margins on high performance computing um
HPC AI chips etc is higher than it is
for mobile um because they have a bigger
advantage in mobile sorry in HPC than
they do in mobile. But anyways, when you
look at what's what's TSMC running
calculus here, actually they're
providing really good um allocations to
companies that are doing CPUs, right? So
when you think about hey Amazon has
Tranium and Amazon has uh Graviton and
both of those are on 3 nanometer
graviton being their CPU tranium being
their their AI chip they're actually
TSMC is much more excited to give
allocation to Graviton than they are to
tranium because they view CPU business
as more stable long-term growth right
and as a company that is conservative
and doesn't want to ride cycles of
growth too hard you actually want to
allocate to the uh the market that is
more stable and lower growth rate first
before you allocate all the incremental
capacity to the fast growth rate market.
Now that is that is the case generally
and so when you look at like hey same
for AMD right the allocations they get
on um you know their CPUs is is like
TSMC is much more excited about those
than they are for GPUs. Um likewise for
Amazon and Nvidia um is is a bit unique
because all yes they have CPUs yes they
make switches yes they make networking
um they make NVLink they make all these
different Infiniban Ethernet all these
different products nicks um by and large
most of these things will be on 3
nanometer by the end of this year with
the Reuben launch and all the chips that
are in that family um the GPU being the
most important one and yet Nvidia is
getting the majority of supply right
part of this is because you look at the
market and you like sort of like you
know TSMC and others like they there are
many ways that they forecast market
demand. Um, [snorts] but also it's dem
market signal, right? The market
signaled, hey, we need this much
capacity next year. We need this much.
We need this much. We'll sign
non-cancable, non-returnable. We may
even pay deposits, right? Things like
this. Nvidia just did it way earlier
than Google or Amazon. And in some
cases, Google and Amazon had stumbling
blocks. You know, there was one one of
the chips got delayed slightly by by a
couple quarters. Trrenium and and all
these sorts of things happened. And then
so in that case there was a huge sort of
like okay well these guys are delaying
but Nvidia is wanting more more more
more and we are checking with the rest
of the supply chain is there enough
capacity right so they're going to all
the PCB vendors and they're saying hey
is there enough uh victory giant is
there enough PCB this is like one of the
largest suppliers of PCBs to Nvidia and
they're a Chinese company all the all
the PCBs come from China sort of from
them um or many of them and and anyways
they're like do you have enough PCB
capacity great oh hey uh memory vendors
who has all the memory capacity okay
Nvidia does great Um, so when you look
at sort of in the same way, you know,
who who is AGI pilled enough to buy
compute in long timelines at levels that
seem ridiculous to people who aren't AGI
pilled, but nonetheless, they're willing
to pay a pretty good margin um, and sign
it now because they view in the future
that that ratio is screwed up. The same
thing happens with the supply chain for
semiconductors, right? Nvidia was while
I don't think Nvidia is quite AGI
pilled, right? You know, Jensen doesn't
believe software is going to be
automated fully and all these things,
right?
>> Accelerated computing, not AI chips,
>> It's AI chips, right?
>> But that's what he calls it, right?
>> Yeah. Because I mean, I think there's a
broader term, right? AI is within that,
but like physics modeling and
simulations and like
>> or but just like he's not embracing the
sort of like main use case. And
>> I think he's embracing it, but like I
just don't think he's like AGI pilled
like Daario, right?
But he's still way more ag
and and and and the reason is pretty
simple. You know, you can see all the
data center construction. He's like,
"Okay, I want to have this market
share." Um, you know, we sort of like
have all the data centers tracked and
you know, you can see, you know, there's
there's a lot of data centers that you
could say, well, they could be one or
the other, right? Right. And so in some
to some extent, Google and Amazon, you
know, Google especially, even though
they're, you know, their TPU is just
better for them to deploy. They have to
deploy a crapload of GPUs because they
don't have enough TPUs to fill up their
data centers. They can't get them
fapped.
>> Wait, can I So I have a question about
that. Google sold I think a million, was
it the V7s, the Ironwoods to Enthropic,
>> and you're saying in general there's
this the big bottleneck right now, this
year or next year? I mean I guess going
forward forever now is going to be the
the you know logic memory the stuff that
like it takes to build these ships and
Google has deep mind this is the other
third prominent AI lab and if this is
the big bottleneck why would they sell
it rather than just giving it to deep
mind
>> right so so this is again like a problem
of like you know deep mind people were
like this is insane why do we do this
right but then Google cloud people and
Google executives saw a different like
thought process right and basically um
you you know you and I for the comput
team. There's one guy from, you know,
both of them actually came from Google
uh at at the main people on on uh the
compute team at Thropic. They saw this
dislocation. They negotiated a deal and
they were able to get access to these to
this compute before Google realized. And
so the actually the chain of events at
least from our data that we found was in
in early Q3 um we saw over the course of
two uh over the course of like six weeks
we we saw capacity on um anthropic or
sorry on TPUs go up by a significant
amount over the course of those six
weeks and it went up like multiple times
in those six weeks right there were
multiple requests. Google even had to go
to TSMC and explain to them why they
needed this uh increase in capacity
because it was so sudden. But that a lot
of that capacity increase was for
selling to Anthropic.
>> Yeah.
>> Because Enthropic saw it before Google.
And then Google had Nano Banano and
Gemini 3 which caused their user metrics
to skyrocket and leadership at Google
was like oh and then they started making
the statement of we have to double
compute every is it 6 months or I don't
remember the exact number that they
said. Um, but they they really woke up a
lot more and then they're like, "Oh, hey
TSMC, we want more. We want more." And
it's like, "Well, sorry guys. Like,
we're sold out for next year." Um, we
can work on next year. We can maybe get
like 5 10% more for 26, but really we're
going to work on 27, right? There's sort
of like, you know, there's this like
information asymmetry of the labs in my
mind, right? And I don't know if this is
exactly it's the narrative I've spun
myself from seeing all the data in the
supply chain and like wafer orders and
like what's going on with the data
centers that you know anthropic signed
and fluid stack signed and all this like
sort of it's it's it's it's pretty clear
to me that Google screwed up and you can
see this from Google's Gemini ARRs right
um they had next to nothing in Q1 Q3 uh
Q3 a little bit right once they started
inlecting but Q4 they were at like 5
billion AR right um exiting or something
like this so it's like or five billion
revenue for Q4 uh on an ARR basis. Um,
and so it's clearly like Google didn't
see revenue skyrocket. Um, and in a
sense, right, Anthropic was not willing,
you know, is kind of had like a little
bit of commitment issues before their AR
exploded, even though they have far more
information asymmetry and see what's
coming down the pipe. Google is going to
be more conservative than Anthropic is.
A, and B, Google had had even less ARR.
Um, so they they sort of were like I
think just not willing to like sort of
do it and then they realized they should
do it. And so now since then Google um
has gotten absurdly agilled, right? Uh
in terms of like what they're doing,
they bought an energy company. They're
buying putting deposits down for
turbines. Uh they're buying a ridiculous
percentage of the powered land. Uh
they're going to utilities and
negotiating long-term agreements.
They're doing this on the data center
and um power side um very very
aggressively. Right. So, you know, I
think Google woke up towards the end of
last year, but it took them some time.
>> And how many gigawatts do you think
Google will have by the end of next
year?
>> Buy my data. [laughter]
>> You charge for that kind of information.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> Um, I feel like every year the
bottleneck for what is preventing us
from scaling AI compute keeps changing.
Uh, a couple years ago was coast. Last
year it was power. This year, you'll
tell me what the bottleneck is this
year. But I want to understand 5 years
out what will be the thing that is
constraining us from deploying the
singularity.
>> Yeah, I think the biggest bottleneck is
compute and for that the longest lead
time supply chains are not power or data
centers. They're actually the
semiconductor supply chain themselves,
right? It switches back from being power
and data center uh as a major bottleneck
to chips. And in the chip supply chain,
there's a number of different
bottlenecks, right? There's memory,
there's uh logic wafers from TSMC,
there's uh there's fabs themselves.
Construction of the fabs takes a couple
years, three two to three years versus a
data center takes uh less than a year,
right? Uh we've seen Amazon build data
centers in as fast as 8 months, right?
So there's a big difference in lead
times because of the complexity of the
building, the fab that actually makes
the chips. And then the tools, right?
Those also have really long lead times.
And so the bottlenecks as we've scaled
have shifted from hey what is a supply
chain currently not what is it currently
not able to do um which was cos and
power and data centers but those were
all shorter leadtime items right cos is
a much more simple process of packaging
chips together um power and data centers
are ultimately way more simple than the
actual manufacturing of the chips and so
there's been some sliding of of of
capacity across you know mobile or PC to
data center chips but that's been
somewhat funible whereas on in whereas
co-as and power and data centers those
have sort of had to start a new as
supply chains but now there's sort of no
more capacity for the mobile and PC
industries which used to be the majority
of the semiconductor industry to shift
over to AI right Nvidia is now the
largest customer at TSMC and Nvidia is
the largest customer SKH highex the
largest memory manufacturer right so
it's sort of impossible for this scaling
or the sliding of resources away from
the common person, right? PCs and and
smartphones to shift anymore towards the
AI chips. And so now, how do we scale
the AI chip production? And that's the
biggest bottleneck as we go to 2030 is
those.
>> It'd be very interesting if there's an
absolute gigawatt ceiling that you can
project out to 2030 based just on, hey,
we can't produce more than this many EUV
machines,
>> right? So to scale compute further right
there's some different bottlenecks this
year next year uh but ultimately by 2829
the bottleneck falls to the lowest rung
on the supply chain which is ASML right
ASML makes the world's most complicated
machine i.e. an EUV tool. Um, and the
selling price for those is $300400
million. And currently they can make
about 70. Next year they'll get to 80.
Uh, even under very aggressive supply
chain expansion, they only get to a
little bit over a hundred by the end of
the decade. And so what does that mean?
Okay, they can make a hundred of these
tools by the end of the decade and um,
you know, 70 right now. How does that
actually translate to AI compute, right?
We we see all these numbers from Sam
Alman and and many others across the
supply chain. gigawatts, gigawatts,
gigawatts, right? How many gigawatts are
we adding? Um, and we see, you know,
Elon saying, "Hey, the 100 gigawatts in
space
>> a year."
>> A year, right? The the problem with any
of uh these numbers or the challenge to
these numbers is, you know, actually not
the power, not the data center. We can
dive into that, but it's it's it's
manufacturing the chips, right? So, a
gigawatt of, you know, Nvidia's Reuben
chips, right? So, Reuben is announced at
GTC uh I believe the week this podcast
goes live. And to make a gigawatt worth
of data center capacity of Nvidia's
latest chip that they're releasing at
the end of this year, towards the end of
this year, you need, you know, a few
different wafer technologies, right? Um,
you need about 55,000 wafers of 3
nanometer. You need about 6,000 wafers
of 5nanmter, and then you need about
170,000 wafers of DRAM, right? Memory.
And so across these three different
buckets, um, each of these requires
different amounts of EUV, right? So when
you manufacture a wafer, uh, there's
thousands and thousands of process steps
where you're depositing material,
removing them, but the sort of key
critical step, which at least in
advanced logic is like 30% of the cost
of the chip, is something that doesn't
actually put anything on the wafer,
right? You take the wafer, you deposit
photoresist, which is like a chemical
that basically chemically changes when
you expose it to light and then you
stick it into the EV tool, which shines
light at it in a certain way. It
patterns it, right? Because there is
what's called a mask, which is a stencil
effectively for the design. And so when
you look at a wafer, um, you know,
leading edge 3 nmter wafer has 70 or so
masks, right? 70 or so layers of
lithography, but 20 of them are the most
advanced EUV, right? And that
specifically, you know, if you think
about, okay, well, if I need 55,000
wafers for a gigawatt, if I do 20 EUV w
uh passes per wafer, you then you can do
the math, that's like, okay, that's 1.1
million passes of EUV for a single
gigawatt. So, actually like it's pretty
simple. And then once you add the rest
of the stuff, it ends up being 2
million, right? Across 5 nanometer and
all the memory, you're at roughly um 2
million EUV passes for a single
gigawatt. You know, these these tools
are very complicated. So, um, when you
think about what it's doing across a
wafer, it's taking the wafer and it's
scanning and it's stepping across,
right? It's scanning, stepping across,
and it does this hundreds of times
across the entire or dozens of times
across the whole wafer. And and so when
you're talking about, hey, how many UV
passes? That's the entire wafer is being
exposed um at a certain rate. A wafer
EUV tool can do roughly 75 wafers per
hour. Um, and the tool is up roughly 90%
of the time, right? So in the end you
end up with actually I need about three
and a half EUV tools to do the 2 million
EUV wafer passes for the gigawatt. So
three and a half EUV tools uh satisfies
a gigawatt. So it's funny to think about
the numbers, right? Because we're
talking about oh what's a gigawatt cost?
It costs like $50 billion roughly,
right? Whereas what does three and a
half EUV tools cost? That's like 1.2,
right? um it's actually like quite a
lower number which is which is
interesting to think about like oh 50
gigawatts of economic you know sort of
capex in in the data center and what
gets built on top of that in terms of
tokens is even larger right it might be
hundred billion dollars worth of AI
value into the supply chain is held up
by this $1.2 two billion dollars worth
of tooling that simply just cannot
expand its supply chain quickly.
>> And I think so you you read this article
recently where you're saying over the
last three years TSMC has done hundred
billion dollars of capex. So it's like
30 30 uh 40 and if if you think of I
mean a small fraction of that is sort of
like being used by Nvidia for the 3nmter
that it's going to or you know
previously 4nmter that it's using for
its chips. Um but Nvidia has turned that
into what was what are it's like your
earnings last quarter was like 40
billion into 40 billion times four. So $
160 billion. So Nvidia alone is turning
some small fraction of hundred billion
in capex that's going to be depreciated
over many years not just this one year
into $160 billion in a single year. And
then that gets even more intense when
you go down the supply chain to ASML
which is taking a billion dollars worth
of machines to produce a gigawatt. And
of course those machines last for more
than a year, right? So it's it's doing
more than that. Okay. So now I want to
understand okay well how many such
machines will there be by 2030 if you
include not just the ones that are sold
that year but are have been compiling
over the previous years. Um, and what
does that imply about the Sam Alman says
he wants to do a gigawatt a week in
2030? Are are when you add up those
numbers, is that compatible with that?
>> Right. That's that's completely
compatible, right? Cuz if you think
about TSMC and the entire ecosystem has
something 250 to 300 EV tools already.
Um, and then you stack on 70 this year,
80 next year, growing to 100 by 2030.
You're at like 700 EV tools by the end
of the decade. Um, 700 EV tools, three
and a half tools per gigawatt. um
assuming it's all allocated to AI which
it's not but three and a half tools per
gigawatt gets you to 200 gigawatts worth
of AI chips for the data centers to
deploy right so 200 gigawatts Sam wants
50 gigawatts right 52 gawatts a year
he's only taking 25% share then right
obviously there's some share given to um
you know mobile and PC uh assuming that
you know for some reason we're allowed
to even have consumer goods still um you
know and we don't get priced out of them
but you know roughly like he's saying
25% % 50 you know 25% market share of
the total chips fab that's that's kind
of like very reasonable given you know
this year alone I think he's going to
have access to 25% of the blackwell GPUs
that are deployed right so it's it's not
that crazy I find it surprising that you
know when was the first uh when did ASML
start shipping EUV tools when 7
nanometer started so I don't know when
that was exactly but you're saying in
2030 they're going to be using machines
that initially were shipped in 2020 so
10 years you're using the
most important machine in this most
technologically advanced industry in the
world. I find that surprising.
>> So, ASML has been shipping EUV tools now
for roughly a decade, but it only
entered mass volume production around
2020. You know, the tools not the same.
Um, you know, back then the tools were
even lower throughput. Um, there were
there's various specifications around
them called overlay, right? You know, I
was mentioning you're stacking layers on
top of each other, right? You'll do some
EUV, you'll do a bunch of different
process steps, depositing stuff, etching
stuff, cleaning the wafer, you know,
dozens of those steps before you do
another EUV layer. Um, there's a spec
called overlay, right? Which is, okay,
you did all this work. You know, you
drew these lines on the wafer. Um, now I
want to draw these dots, right? Let's
just say I want to draw these dots to
connect this these lines of metal to and
then do, you know, holes and then the
next layer up is another set of lines
goes perpendicular. So now you're
connecting wires going perpendicular to
each other. Um there you have to you
have to be able to land them on top of
each other. So it's called overlay and
overlay is a spec that's been improved
rapidly by ASML. Wafer throughput has
been improved rapidly by ASML and also
the price of the tool has gone up but
not as much as the capabilities of the
tool. Right? Initially the UV tools were
like 150 million and over time they're
now like 400 million uh you know as I as
I look out to 2028. But the capabilities
of the tools have more than doubled as
well, right? Especially um on throughput
and overlay accuracy, which is the
ability to stack, you know, accurately
align the the sub subsequent passes on
top of each other um even though you do
tons of steps between. And so this is
this is um you know, ASML is improving
super rapidly. I think it's also
something noteworthy to say ASML is
you know, maybe one of the most generous
companies in the world, right? They have
this lynchpin thing. No one has anything
competitive. Maybe China will have some
EUV by the end of the decade, but no one
else, you know, has anything even close
to EUV. Um, and yet they haven't taken
price and margins up like crazy, right?
You know, you go ask, you know, some
other folks, you know, that we talk to
all the time, like, you know, for
example, Liupold and they're like, why
you know, let's let's, you know, let's
let's have the price go up, right? Uh,
because they can. The margin is there.
You can you can take the margin like
Nvidia takes the margin. memory players
are taking the margin, but ASML has
never risen the price more than they've
increased the capability of the tool.
Um, and so in a sense, they've always
provided net benefit to their customer.
It's not that the tool is stagnant, it's
just that like you know these tools are
old. Yes, you can upgrade them some and
the new tools are coming. And for
simplicity sake, we're kind of ignoring
you know the advances for this podcast,
the advances in overlay or throughput
per tool. So you say we're producing 60
of these machines uh this year and then
70 80 over subsequent years.
What what would happen if ASML just
decided to double its capex or triple
its capex? What is preventing them from
producing more than 100 in 2030? Why why
so confident that even 5 years out you
can be uh relatively sure what their
production will be?
>> So I think I think a couple factors
here, right? ASML has not decided to
just go yolo. Let's expand capacity as
fast as possible, right? Um in general
the semiconductor supply chain has not
right it's lived through the booms and
bust and uh we can talk a bit more about
it but basically no one you know some
players as of very recently have like
woken up but in general no one really
sees demand for 200 gawatts a year of AI
chips or you know trillions of dollars
of spend a year in the semiconductor
supply chain. They're just like they're
not they're not AI pill right they're
not AI
>> we're going to get to trillion dollars
this year. [laughter] Yeah, I I
[clears throat] I I I I I feel you, but
I'm just saying like no one really
understands this in the supply chain.
Um, constantly we're told our numbers
are way too high and then when they're
right, they're like, "Oh, yeah, yeah,
but your your next year's numbers are
still too high." And it's like, but
anyways, like ASML has sort of their
tool has four major components, right?
It has um the source, right, which is
made by Simer in San Diego. Um, it has
the uh reticle stage, which is made in
Wilmington, uh, Connecticut, right? It
has the wafer stage um and the um the
optics, right? The lenses and such. And
those two are made in Europe, right? And
so when you when you look at each four
each of these four, they're tremendously
complex supply chains that a they have
not tried to expand massively and b when
they try to expand them, the time lag is
quite long, right? Um and so again, this
is the most complicated machine that
humans make period, right? At at a
volume um at any sort of volume. But
like let's talk about the source
specifically, right? What does the spor
source do? It drops these tin droplets.
It hits it three subsequent times with a
laser perfectly. So the first one uh
hits this tin droplet, expands out. It
hits it again. So it expands out to this
perfect shape and then it blasts it at
super high power and um the tin droplets
get excited enough that they release uh
EUV light 13.5 nmter and then it's in
this thing that is like basically
collecting all the light and directing
it into the lens stack. Right. Then you
have the lens stack which is Carl's ice,
right, as you mentioned. and and and
some other folks, but Zeiss being the
most important part of it. Um, they also
have not tried to expand production
capacity because they don't see any, you
know, they they they're like, "Oh, yeah,
yeah, like we're growing a lot because
of AI. We're growing from 60 to 100,
right?" It's like, "No, no, no. We need
to go to like a couple hundred, but it's
it's fine, whatever." Um, each of these
tools has, you know, I think 18 um of
these lenses effectively um mirrors. Um
they are they are multi-layer mirrors
which are perfect layers of malibdonum
and uh ruthenium if I recall correctly
um stacked on top of each other in many
layers and then the light bounces off of
it perfectly but it's not just like you
know like when we think about a lens you
know it's it's like in a shape and it
focuses the light. This is a this is
like a mirror that's also a lens and so
it's pretty complicated. Any defect in
this perfect layer of stack in this in
these like uh super thinly deposited
stacks will mess it up. uh any curvature
issues like there is a lot of challenges
with scaling the production. Um it's
quite artisal right in this sense right
because you're not making tens of
thousands of these a year you're making
hundreds you're making thousands right
uh you know talk about 60 tools a year
um 18 of these per tool you end up with
you know you're still in the um you know
hundreds of tools uh or thousand you're
at the thousand number roughly for these
these lenses um and projection optics.
So then you and then you step forward to
the reticle stage uh which is also
something really uh crazy. This thing
moves at I want to say 9gs like it it
will shift 9gs because as you step
across a wafer the tool will go um and
and the wafer stage is complimentary.
It's the wafer part. So you you line
these two things up. You're taking all
the light through the lenses that's
focused and and here's the reticle.
Here's the wafer and you're passing uh
the reticle is moving one direction. and
the wafer is moving the d the other
direction as it scans a uh 26x 33 mm
section of the wafer and then it stops
it shifts over to another part of the
wafer and does it again and it does that
in just seconds right and it and each of
them are moving at 9gs in opposite
directions so each of these things is
like a wonder and marvel of like
chemistry uh fabrication you know um you
know sort of like mechan mechanical
engineering um optical engineering
because you have to align all these
things and make sure they're perfect. Uh
all these things have crazy amounts of
metrology because you have to perfectly
test everything because if anything is
messed up, the yield goes to zero,
right? Because this is such a finely
tuned system. And by the way, you it's
so large that you're building it in all
these you're building in the factory in
Hindovven uh Netherlands and then you're
deconstructing it and shipping it on
many planes to the customer site and
then you're reassembling it there and
testing it again. And that process takes
many many months. So like it's it's just
there's so many steps in the supply
chain right whether it's Zeiss making
their uh lenses and projection optics or
Simer which is an ASML owned company
making the EUV source and each of these
has its own complex supply chain right
ASML's commented their supply chain has
over 10,000 people in it right
>> like individual suppliers
>> yes and it might not be directly it
might be through like hey you know Zeiss
has so many suppliers and you know XYZ
company has so many suppliers but you
know they these you know if you just
think about like okay you're talking
about two physically moving objects that
are like this large and this large you
know um the size of a wafer, right? And
it has to be accurate to the level of
you know singledigit nanometers or even
smaller because the entire system the
overlay right layer to layer uh
variation has to be on the order of 3
nmters right um and so if the overlay is
3 nmters that means each individual part
the accuracy of its physical movement
has to be even less than that right it
has to be sub one nanometer in most
cases because the the error of these
things stacks up right and and and so
there's no way to like, you know, just
like snap your fingers and increase
production, right? You know, things
simple as power, right? The US going
from 0% power growth to 2% power growth
even though China's already at 30 was
like so hard for America to do, right?
Um and and and that's a really simple
supply chain with very few people in the
supply chain, right? uh who make
difficult things and there's you know
probably what a h 100red thousand
electricians people who work in the
supply chain uh of electricity um or
more in the US and you know when you
look at oh ASML employs like so few
people Carl Zeiss probably employs like
less than a thousand people working on
this and all of those people are like
super super specialized so it's you know
you can't just train random people up
for this like in the snap of a finger
you can't just get your entire supply
chain to get galvanized right Nvidia's
has had to do a lot um to get the entire
supply chain to even deliver the
capacity they're going to make this
year. Even though when you look go talk
to enthropic they're like well we're
short of TPUs we're short of training
we're short of GPUs when you go talk to
open eye they're like we're short of
these things right um so open anthropic
they know they need xvidia is not quite
as agi and they they're building uh you
know x minus one um and you go down the
supply chain everyone's doing minus one
and in some cases they're doing like
divided by two right because they just
don't they're not agi pill right I think
and and and so you end up with the time
lag for this whip to react right you
know the the cur the sort of AI
pilledness is and and desire to increase
production is so long and then once they
finally understand, hey, we need to
increase production rapidly, right? And
they they think they understand, oh, AI
means we go from 60 to 100 in addition
to the tools all just getting better and
faster, you know, the source getting
higher power from 500 watts to a,000 and
you know, all these other aspects of the
supply chain, you know, advancing
technically plus increase of production.
They think they're they're like actually
increasing production a lot. But if you
float through the numbers of hey what
does Elon want? He wants 100 gigawatts a
year in space by 2028 is it um or 2029
and you know Sam Olman wants 50 gawatt
52 gawatts a year um by the end of the
decade and you look at you know
pryanthropic needs the same and then you
know Google needs that you know you go
across the supply chain it's like wait
no the supply chain can't possibly build
enough capacity for everyone to get what
they want on the side of compute
>> real conversations are full of fits and
starts and pauses and interruption ions.
I mean, just listen to this episode. At
least superficially, voice models have
gotten pretty good at handling these
kinds of things. But at a deeper level,
interruptions can throw off a model's
understanding and degrade the quality of
it responses. And it's not always clear
why. Labelbox realized that this was a
huge bottleneck for their customers. So,
they built an evaluation pipeline called
Echo Chain to help you diagnose and fix
your voice model specific failure modes.
Echochain starts by feeding
conversations into your voice model. It
then injects interruptions at specific
intervals and classifies any failures
into one of three different modes. One,
did it acknowledge a correction but keep
the old plan? Two, did it adapt briefly
but then slide back to old assumptions?
Or three, did it abandon the old task
entirely? This is extremely useful
information because label box can get
your model the exact data it needs to
fix whatever issue is preventing it from
being a viable and competent voice
model. So if you want to ensure that
your voice model stays performant in
real conversations, you should reach out
to Labelbox. go to
labelwalks.com/corecash.
[music]
So I feel like in the um in the data
center supply chain for the last few
years people have been making arguments
of this specific thing we are
bottlenecked by therefore AI compute
can't scale more than X but then as
you've written about oh no if you know
say the grid is a bottleneck then we
just do um we just do behind the meter
on the site we do gas turbines etc. If
that doesn't work, there's like all
these other alternatives that people
fall back on. And I I want to ask you a
question about what whether we can
imagine a similar thing happening in the
semiconductor supply chain. So if EUV
becomes a bottleneck, well, you know,
what if we just went back to 7 nanometer
and do what China is doing currently and
producing 7 nanometer chips with uh
multi-patterning with DUV machines. Um
and you know if you look at a 7
nanometer ship like the A100 um there's
been a lot of progress obviously since
from the A100 to the B100 or B200 but um
how much of that progress is just
numerous and then like if if you just
told constant say uh FP16 from A100 to
B100 the B100 is like a little over one
pedlop and then uh A100 is like 300
teraflops
And so you have you have like basically
3x uh holding numeric constant you have
like a 3x improvement from a100 to b100
and then some of that is the process
improvement some of that is just the
accelerator design improving which you
know we could replicate again in the
future and so then it just seems like
actually it's like very small effect
from the process improving from 7
nanometer to 4 nanometer. So I don't
know say we have I don't know the
numbers off hand but let's say there's
like 150k wafers per month of 3
nanometer and then eventually similar
amounts for 2 nanometer but then there's
a similar amount for 7 nanometer right
so if you have all those old wafers and
then there's maybe a 50% haircut because
the process you know the bits per wafer
area are like what is it 50% less or
something um then it's like it doesn't
seem like that bad to just bring out 7
nanometer wafers and then oh that gives
you another 50 for 100 another 100
gawatt. Um yeah, tell tell me why that's
naive. Yeah. So I think you know we
potentially do go crazy enough that this
is this happens because we just need
incremental compute and the compute is
worth the higher cost power etc of these
chips
but it's it's also unlikely to some
extent uh to a large extent because of I
think I think just comparing you know
some of these are like not fair
comparisons right um for example you
know from A100 which is 312 teraflops to
uh blackwell which is like a thousand
um ish of FP16 um or maybe it's 2,000
and then Reuben is like 5,000 or so
FP16. It's it's not a fair comparison
because these chips have vastly
different um you know design targets,
right? At at A100, that's what that that
is what Nvidia optimized for was FP16, B
flat 16 numeric. When you look at uh
Hopper, they didn't care as much about
that. They cared about FP8. When when
you look at Reuben, they don't care
about about FP16 and BF16 as much. uh
they care mostly about FP4 and six,
right? Um and so numeric like are what
they've designed the search designed
their chip for. Um and so there's a
couple like, you know, okay, let's just
say let's redesign, let's make a new
chip design on 7 nmter. Sure, we can do
that. Like and then it's optimized for
uh the numeric of the modern day. The
performance difference is still going to
be much larger than the flops different
you mentioned, right? Um, often it's
easy to boil things down to flops uh per
watt or flops per dollar, but that's
actually not a fair comparison, right?
Um, and so this is where sort of you can
bring in, hey, let's look at Kimmy K1 or
DeepSseek. When you look at Kimmy or or
Kimmy K2.5, sorry, and Deepseek, when
you look at these two models and you
look at their performance on Hopper
versus Blackwell on, you know, very
optimized software, you get vastly
different performance, right? And most
of this is not attributed to flops. A
lot of this is and or numeric, right?
Because those models are actually 8bit.
So it's not like Blackwell's uh and
Hopper, they're both optimized for 8bit
and Blackwell's not really taking
advantage of its 4bit there. Um you
know, the performance gulf is is
actually much larger. And you know the
way you can sort of compare them and
think about them is sure it's one thing
to you know shrink process technology
and make the transistors smaller and
each chip has x number of flops but you
forget the big gating factors which is
these models don't run on a single chip
they run on hundreds of chips at a time
right if you look at deepseek's
production deployment which is well over
a year old now they were running on 160
GPUs right um and that's what they serve
production traffic on and so they split
the model across 160 GPUs every time you
cross the barrier of a chip to another
chip. there is an efficiency loss
because you now have to uh transmit over
you know high-speed electrical certities
and there's a latency cost there's a
power cost there's a there's all these
um dynamics that hurt as you shrink and
shrink and shrink the process node
you've increased the amount of compute
in a single chip now in chip right uh
movement of data is you know at at
hundreds or of of at least tens of
terabytes a second if not hundreds of
terabytes a second um whereas between
chips you're on the order of terabytes
of second, right? Um and and and so this
this movement of data between chips that
are super close to each other physically
and then you can only put so many chips
close to each other physically. So you
have to put chips in different racks,
the order of uh data uh between that is
on the order of hundreds of gigabits a
second, right? 400 gig or 800 gig
second. Um so 100 gigabytes a second
roughly. And so you've got this like
huge ladder of like oh on chip I can
commun communicate at super fast speeds.
Within the rack I can communicate at you
know order magnitude speeds. outside the
rack I can communicate at an even order
of magnitude lower than that and as you
break the bounds of chips you end up
with this performance loss. Anyways, the
reason I explain this is because when I
look at when you look at Hopper versus
Blackwell, even if both of them are
using, you know, a rack worth of chips,
the Hopper is significantly slower
because the amount of performance that
you have leveraged to the task within
that, you know, within each domain of
hey, tens of terabytes a second of
communication between these transistors
or or these processing elements and you
know terabytes a second between these
processing elements is much much higher
and therefore the performance is much
higher. So when you look at inference at
let's say 100 tokens a second for
deepseek and kimk 2.5 hopper versus
blackwell the performance difference is
on the order of 20x interesting
>> not two or 3x like the flops performance
difference indicates even though those
are on the same process node um you know
there's just differences in networking
technologies and what they've worked on
and so you can translate some of these
back um but when you look at like Ruben
what they're doing on 3 nanometer some
of these things are just not possible to
do all the way back on A100 even if you
make a new chip for uh 7 nanometer.
There's just like certain architectural
improvements you can port. There's
certain ones you cannot. Um and and so
the performance difference is not just
going to be the difference in flops.
It's in some senses cumulative between
the difference in you know flops per
chip, networking speed between chips,
how many flops are on a chip versus a
system, memory bandwidth on a single
chip and on a entire system. All of
these things compound.
>> Can I ask you a very naive question? So
this year, last year the B200 has now
two dieseS on a single chip. So you can
get that bandwidth on a single chip
without having to go through me link or
infinite band. And then next year Ruben
Ultra will have four dies on one chip.
What is preventing us from just doing
that with an old like how many dies
could you have on a single chip and
still get these tens of terabytes a
second?
>> Yeah. So, so even within Blackwell, um
there are differences in performance
when you go when you're communicating on
the chip versus across the chips. Uh
those those bounds are obviously much
smaller than when you're going, you
know, out of the entire chip, but each
die versus uh you know, within the
package. And so anyways, when you scale
per uh you know, the number of chips up,
there is some performance loss. It's not
just perfect, but it is way better than
different entire packages. Now, how
large can advanced packaging scale? Um
the way Nvidia is doing it is co-ass the
way uh you know Google and with Broadcom
and MediaTek and you know Amazon tranium
all these chips are doing is called coas
but actually you can go and look back at
what um what Tesla did with Dojo right
dojo uh which they cancelled and
restarted I don't know anyways dojo was
a chip that was the size of an entire
wafer they had 25 chips on it um and
there were some trade-offs right they
couldn't put HBM on it um But the
positive side was it that they had 25
chips uh on it. And so to date, it is
still probably the best chip for running
convolutional neuronet networks. Um it's
just not great at transformers because
the you know the sort of the shape of
the chip, the memory, the arithmetic,
all all these various specifications of
it are just not well suited for
transformers. They're well suited for
CNN's. Um and anyway so so you know dojo
chips were optimized around that they
made a bigger package but at the same
time you know as you make packages
bigger and bigger and bigger you have
other constraints right networking speed
uh memory bandwidth cooling capabilities
all of these things start to rear their
heads it's not simple but yes you will
see a trend line of more chips on the
package and yes you're going to be able
to do that on 7 nanmter in fact that's
what Huawei did with their um Ascend 910
C or D uh they But they put they were
initially just one and then they did
two. Um and they're focusing on scaling
the packaging up because that is an area
where they can advance faster than sort
of process technology where they can't
shrink. But at the end of the day that's
still, you know, that's something that
you can do on the leading edge chips
too, right? Anything you do on 7
nanometer, you can also probably do on 3
nometer in terms of packaging. Um so if
we're if you end up in this world in
2030 where the west has the most
advanced process technology but it has
not ramped it up as much whereas China I
don't know if you think by 2030 they
would have EUV and I don't know 2
nanometer or whatever but they are
semiconductor pill so they are producing
in mass quantity.
Um basically I'm wondering what the year
is where there's a crossover where our
advantage in process technology has
faded enough and their advantage in
scale has increased enough and also
their advantage in like having one
country that has the entire supply chain
and visioniz rather than having random
suppliers in Germany and Netherlands and
whatever would mean that China would be
ahead in its ability to like produce
mass flops.
>> Yeah. So to date um China still does not
have you know entire indigenized
semiconductor supply chain right
>> but were they in 2030
>> yeah by 2030 it's it's possible that
they do uh but but to date right all of
of China's 7 nanmter and 14 nmter
capacity uses ASML DUV tools right um
and the amount that they can ship and
import from ASML is is large and uh but
the point being that the vast majority
of ASML's revenue especially on EUV, all
of it uh is outside of China. So the
scale advantage is still in the favor of
the of let's call it the West plus
Taiwan, Japan, etc.
>> They're trying to make their own DUV and
EUV tools, right?
>> They're trying to do all these things.
The question is how fast can they
advance um and and scale up production
as well as quality. And to date, we
haven't seen that. Now, I'm quite
bullish that they're going to be able to
do these things over the next 5 to 10
years, right? Really scale up
production, really uh kick it into high
gear. They have more engineers working
on it. They're um they have more uh
desire to throw capital up.
>> So by 2030, do they have fully
indigenized DUV?
>> Uh I think for sure. For sure. DUV. Yes.
>> And fully indigenousized EUV by 2030.
>> I think they'll have working tools. I
don't think that they'll be able to
manufacture a bunch yet, right? You
know, there's they're sort of having it
work and then there's production hell,
right? Um and ultimately like ASML had
EUV working in the early 2010s at some
capacity, right? Now the tools were not
accurate enough. They were not uh scaled
for high production for scaled for high
volume manufacturing reliable enough.
And then they had to ramp production and
that all took time. Production hell
takes time, right? Which is why it took
another 5 to seven years to get EUV into
mass production at a fab rather than
just working in the lab.
>> So how many um DUV tools do you think
anybody will manufacture in 2030?
>> ASML.
>> No. Uh China.
>> Oh, that's a great question. Um
you know current It's it's it's a bit of
a
a challenge to look into this supply
chain especially. We try really hard. Um
but you know for in some instances
[clears throat] they're like buying
stuff from Japanese vendors and if they
want a fully indigenized supply chain
they need to not buy these lenses or buy
these uh projection optics or stages
from Japanese vendors. They need to
build it internally. So it's really
tough to say where they'll be able to
get to. Like I I honestly think it's
like a shot in the dark. But it's it's
probably not unlikely that they'll be
able to do, you know, on the order of a
100 DUV tools a year. Uh whereas ASML is
doing hundreds of DUV tools a year
currently. You know, no one's made a
process node, no company has a process
node where they make a million wafers a
month, right? Um Elon says he wants to
do it and China's obviously going to do
it, right? Uh and I don't think the, you
know, TSMC is trying to do that. um the
memory makers may get there as well,
right? To the million wafers a month,
but not in a single fab. It it's it's
it's sort of mind-boggling to think of
that scale. Um and challenging to see
the supply chain galvanized for that.
So I'm not sure, you know, I don't want
to doubt, you know, China's capability
to scale,
>> right? I guess this is an interesting
question and I think it might you know
at some point semi analysis we'll do the
deep dive on this but I think this
question of like by when would China be
able like indigenized Chinese production
would could be bigger than the rest of
the west combined if you just add up
like all the and put in the input of
your model when they'll have DUV
machines that scale when they'll have UV
machines that scale because I think
there's this like question around if you
have long timelines on AI by long
meaning 2035 which is not that long in
the grand scheme of things. um should
you expect a world where China is like
dominating in semiconductors which I
think I don't know doesn't get asked
enough in San Francisco we're just like
thinking on time scale of like you know
weeks and then if you're outside of San
Francisco you're not thinking about AGI
at all and so this question of like okay
what if we have AGI what if you have
this transformational thing that is
commanding tens of trillions of dollars
or hundreds of trillions of dollars of
economic growth and weight you know
token output and so forth uh but then it
happens in 2035
and like what does that imply for the
west versus China I think is just like I
don't know the semi analysis has got to
write the definitive model on this.
>> Yeah. So I I think
it's it's really challenging when you
move time scales out that far, right?
Like what we tend to focus on is like
we're tracking every data center, we're
tracking every fab, we're tracking all
the tools and we're tracking where
they're going, but the the time lags for
these things are are relatively short,
right? um we can only make like
reasonably accurate estimates for data
center capacity based on you know land
purchasing and you know permits and
turbine purchasing and all these things
and we know where all these things are
going and we like that's what the data
we sell is but like you know as you go
out to like 2035 you know things are
just so radically different and you
error bars get so large it's kind of
hard to make an estimate uh but at the
end of the day like you know there is if
takeoff or timelines are slow enough
right um then certainly kind of I I
don't see why they wouldn't be able to
catch up drastically, right? Um you
[snorts] know, in in some sense, we've
got like this valley, right, of where,
you know, call it 3 to 6 months ago,
Chinese models were or maybe even now,
Chinese models are competitive as
they've ever been. I think I think Opus
46 and GPD 5.4 have really pulled away
and made the gap a little bit bigger.
But I'm sure, you know, some new Chinese
models will come out. As we move from,
you know, hey, [clears throat] these
companies are selling tokens where they
provide the entire uh reasoning chain
and all that to uh selling automated,
you know, white collar work, right?
Automated software engineer, send them
the request, they give you the result
back and there's a bunch of thinking on
the back end that they don't show you.
The ability to distill out of American
models into Chinese models will be
harder. A B as the scale of the compute
that the labs have, right? OpenAI exited
the year with roughly 2 gigawatts last
year. um Enthropic will get to you know
two plus gigawatts this year and and by
the end of next year they'll both be at
like 10 gigawatts of capacity. um China
has is not scaling their AI lab compute
nearly as fast and so at some point you
know when you can't distill the
learnings from these labs into the
Chinese models plus this compute uh race
that open anthropic Google meta are all
racing on at some point they end up
getting to a point where you know the
model performance should start to
diverge more um and then all of this
capex that's being spent on you know
data centers and all that right Amazon
on, you know, 200 billion, Google 180,
you know, so on and so forth. All these
companies are spending hundreds of
billions of dollars of capex. Um, you
know, there's there's, you know, nearly
a trillion dollars of capex being
invested in data centers in America this
year roughly, right? Um, you you end up
with, okay, well, what's the return on
invested capital here? Uh, you and I
would think that the return on invested
capital for data center capex is very
high. Um, and at least if we look at
Enthropics revenues in, you know,
January, they added like 4 billion. in
February which was a shorter month they
added like six um we'll see what they
can do in March and April um given
compute constraints are what's
bottlenecking their growth right the
reliability of cloud code is actually
quite low because they're so compute
constrained uh but if this continues
then the ROIC on these data centers is
super high um and at some point the US
economy starts growing faster and faster
over the next you know this year and
next year because of all this capex and
all this revenue that these models are
generating um and downstream supply
chain versus China doesn't have that yet
right um they have not built the scale
of infrastructure to then invest in
model uh to invest in models to get to
the capabilities to then deploy these
models at such scale right because when
you look at like entropics hey they're
at call it 20 billion ARR of that you
know the margins are sub 50% at least
last reported by the information so then
you know you're at okay that's like 134
billion of compute that it's running on
rental costwise which is actually like
50 uh billion dollars worth of capex
that someone laid out for Anthropic to
generate their current revenue. Um, and
China has just not done this. If if and
when Anthropic 10x's revenue again, uh,
and I think our our answer would be
when, not if, um, then China doesn't
have the compute to deploy at that
scale. And so there is some sense of
like, oh, we're in fast takeoffish,
right? It's not like we're talking
about, you know, Dyson sphere by X day.
It's more like the revenue is
compounding at such a rate that it does
affect the e economic growth. um and the
resources these labs are gathering are
going so fast that you know and and
China hasn't done that yet. So in that
case the US and the west is actually
diverging. The flip side is actually
these these infrastructure investments
have middling returns. Maybe they're not
as good as as as hoped. You know maybe
Google is wrong for wanting to take free
cash flow to zero and spend $300 billion
on capex next year. Maybe they're just
wrong. Um and you know people on Wall
Street who are bearish and people who
don't understand AI are correct, right?
Um and in which case then the US is
building all this capacity it doesn't
get really great returns and China is
able to build the fully vertical
indigenized supply chain not you know US
Japan Korea uh Taiwan Southeast Asia you
know Europe all these all these
countries together building this like
less vertical supply chain um and in a
sense at some point China is able to
scale past us if AI takes longer to get
to certain capability levels then you
know I would the vast majority of your
guests on this podcast believe
>> it's like fast timelines, US wins, long
timelines, China wins,
>> right? But I don't know like I don't
know what fast timelines means, right?
Like I I like don't think you have to
believe in AGI to have the timelines
where the US wins.
>> Okay, let's go back to memory because I
think this is maybe people on Wall
Street and people in the industry are
understanding how big this is, but maybe
generally people don't understand how
big a deal this is. So we've got this
memory crunch as you're talking about
and earlier I was asking about oh could
we solve for the EUV tool shortage by
going back to 7 nometers. So let me ask
a similar question about memory. Um uh
HBM is made of DM but has 3 to 4x less
uh bits per wafer area than the DM it's
made out of. Is it possible that
accelerators in the future could just
use commodity DRM and not HBM? And so
just we can make much more uh capacity
out of the the DRM we get. And the
reason I think this might be possible is
look,
if we're going to have agents that are
just going off and doing work and it
doesn't really you don't it's not a
synchronous chatbot application, then
you don't necessarily need extremely
high uh fast latency kinds of things
anymore. And so maybe you can have the
low low bandwidth uh because the the
reason you stack DRM into stacks and
make HBM is for higher bandwidth. And so
is it possible to go to HBM uh
accelerators and um and basically have
the opposite of cloud code fast like
have cloud code slow and [laughter]
and do that? Yeah, I think I think at
the end of the day, the incremental
purchaser who's willing to pay the
highest price for tokens also ends up
being the one that's like less price
sensitive. And you know, the the compute
should be allocated in a capitalistic
society towards the val the the goods
that have the highest value and the
private market determines this by
willingness to pay. And so to some
extent um sure Anthropic could actually
release a slow mode, right? They could
release claw slow mode and have an
increase in tokens per dollar by a
significant amount. Um they could
probably like reduce the price of Opus
46 by you know 4x 5x and reduce the
speed by another by maybe just like 2x
like the curve on inference throughput
versus speed is there already just on hm
um and yet they don't um because no one
actually wants to use a slow model and
furthermore on these agentic tasks you
know it's it's great that the model can
run at this time horizon of hours that's
kind of like okay well if the model was
just running slower that hours would
become become a day, right? Um or vice
versa, right? If the model's running
faster, that hours becomes hour. Um and
yet no one really wants to move to that
dayong weight period because the highest
value tasks also have some time time
sensitivity to them, right? And and so
I'm I struggle to see, you know, yes,
you could use DDR. Um but then there's a
couple like things that are challenging
with this, right? You could use regular
DRAM. Um, one is you're you're still
limited. You know, one of the like core
constraints of chips even though
they're, you know, sort of like, you
know, there's a chip is like a certain
size, all of the IO escapes on the edges
of the chip, right? So oftent times, you
know, what you see is the left and the
right of the chip are HPM. The IO from
the chip to the HBM is on the sides, and
then the top and bottom are IO to other
chips, right? Um,
and so if you were to change from HBM to
DDR, then all of a sudden this IO on
this edge would have significantly less
bandwidth, but it had significantly more
capacity per chip.
>> Yeah. because and and and so yes, you're
making less um
you know the the the metric that you
actually care about is bandwidth per
wafer, not bits per wafer
>> because the the thing that is
constraining the flops is just getting
in and out the next matrix. And for that
you just need more bandwidth.
>> Yeah. Getting out the weights and
getting out getting in and out the uh KV
cache, right?
>> And so in many cases these GPUs are not
running at full memory capacity. Yes,
it's obviously like a system design
thing, you know, model hardware software
code design of, hey, what do I what do I
how much KV cache do I do? How much do I
keep on the chip? How much do I offload
to other chips and call when I need it
for tool calling or whatever? How much
do I um how many chips do I paralyze
this on? Obviously, these are like the
the search space of this is like very
broad, which is why we have like
inference X like this is like an open
source model like searches all the
optimal points on inference for a
variety of eight different chips um and
models. Um anyways like the point is you
don't necessar you're not always
necessarily constrained by memory
capacity uh you can be constrained by
flops you can be constrained by network
bandwidth you can be constrained by
memory bandwidth uh or you can be
constrained by memory capacity there's
sort of like four if you really to
simplify it down there's like four
constraints and each of these can break
out into more but in this case if you
switch to DDR yes you produce 4x the
bits per DM wafer but all of a sudden
the constraints shift a lot and your
system design shifts a lot. You go
slower. Yes. Is the market smaller?
Okay, maybe possibly. But also now all
of a sudden all these flops are wasted
because they're just sitting there
waiting for memory. It's like great. I
don't need all that capacity because I
can't really increase batch size because
then the KV cache is going to take even
longer to read. And so you never you can
Yeah.
>> Interesting. What is the bandwidth
difference between HBM and uh a normal
DRM?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, an HBM stack uh of HBM4,
let's just talk about like the stuff
that's in Rubin because that's what
we've been indexing on, is 2048 bits
across connected in an area that's like
13 millimeters wide. Um, so 2048 bits
and it it transfers memory at around 10
gig transfers a second. So, HBM, a stack
of HPM4 is 2048 bits on an area that's
13 mm wide roughly or 11. And that's
that's the shoreline that you're taking
on the chip. And in that shoreline, um,
you have 248 bits transferring at 10
giga transfers per second. Uh, you
multiply those together and you divide
by eight bits to bytes, you're at
roughly 2 and a half terabytes a second
per HBM stack. Right? When you look at
DDR, um, in that same area, it's maybe
64 or 128 bits wide. And that DDR5 is
transferring at any, you know, anywhere
from 6.4 giga transfers a second to
maybe 8 8,000 giga transfers a second.
So your your bandwidth is like
significantly lower lower, right? It's
64* 8,000 divided by 8. Um you're at 60
64 gigabytes a second. Um and even if
you take a generous interpretation of
128 * 8 gig transfers, you're at 128
gigabytes a second for the same
shoreline versus 2 and a half terabytes
a second. There's a there's an order of
magnitude difference in bandwidth per
edge area. And if your chip is a square
or it's 26 by 33, right, is the maximum
size for a chip individual die. um you
only have so much edge area and then on
the inside of that chip you put all your
compute um there's things you can do to
try and change right more SRAMM more
caching blah blah blah uh but at the end
of the day you're very constrained by
bandwidth
>> interesting so um then there's a
question of like where can you destroy
demand to free up enough for AI um and I
guess the picture is especially bad
because as you're saying if it takes 4x
more wafer area to get the same bite for
HBM you had to destroy 4x as much
consumer demand for laptops and phones
and whatever in order to free up one
bite for AI. So what yeah what does this
imply for the next year or two of sorry
for the run on question I think on on
your newsletter you said 30% of the
capex in 2026 of big tech is going
towards memory. Yes.
>> That's insane, right? Yeah. Like of the
600 billion or whatever, you're saying
30% is going just to just to
>> and you know, obviously there's some
level of like margin stacking that
Nvidia does. And so if you separate out,
you know, and you apply their margin to
the memory and the logic, but at the end
of the day, yeah, like a third of their
capex is going to memory.
>> That's that's so that's crazy. Okay, so
what is the question I'm trying to ask?
It's something like, yeah, what is this?
What basically what should we expect
over the next year or two as this memory
crunch hits? Yeah. So, memory crunch
will continue to be harder and harder.
Um, and prices continue to go up and
this affects different parts of the
market differently, right? Um, gets to
sort of the like are people going to
hate AI more and more? Yes. Because now
smartphones and PCs are not going to get
incrementally better year and in fact
they're going to incrementally worse.
And
>> if you look at the bill of materials of
a iPhone, what fraction of it is the
memory? Like how much more expensive
does an iPhone get if the memory is 2x
more expensive or whatever it has to be?
So, um I believe an iPhone has 12
gigabytes of memory. Um each gig cost
used to cost roughly three or four
dollars. So, it's 50 bucks. Um but now
the price of memory is like tripled.
Let's call it if it's now uh it's 12
bucks per gig for DDR. So, now you're
talking about $150 versus $50, right? A
$100 increase in cost on Apple. Also,
Apple has some margin. They're not just
going to eat the margin. So, now that's
a $100 cost increase. That's just on the
DRM. The NAND also has the same sort of
like market. So, in fact, you know, it's
probably a $150 increase on the on the
iPhone. Apple has to either pass it on
to the consumer, A, or B, they have to
eat it. I don't see Apple reducing their
margin too much. Maybe they eat a little
bit, but at the end of the day, that
means the end consumer is paying $250
more for an iPhone. Um, and now that's
on like, hey, what is last year's memory
pricing versus today's? Now, there's
some lag for Apple to have to feel the
heat because they have tended to have,
you know, three, six, or a year-long
contracts for a lot of memory, but at
the end of the day, Apple gets hit
pretty hard by this. Um, but they won't
they won't really adjust until the next
iPhone release. But that's the high end
of the market. Actually, that's only a
few hundred million phones a year,
right? Apple sells what, two 300 million
phones a year. The bulk of the market is
this mid-range, low end, right? Uh, used
to be 1.4 million smartphones were sold
a year. Now we're at like 1.1 uh but our
projections are we maybe get down to
like 800 million this year and next year
like 600 or 500 million because and and
we look at like you know there's some
data points out of China um from some of
our analysts in Asia and Singapore and
Hong Kong and Taiwan. They've they've
been tracking this and they see Xiaomi
and OPPO are cutting low-end and
mid-range smartphone volumes by half
because yes, it's only a $150 price
increase on a $1,000 smartphone um or
$150 bomb increase on $1,000 iPhone
where Apple has some larger margin. But
if we look at the smaller phones, the
percentage of the bomb that goes to
memory and storage is much larger and
the margins are lower. So there's less
capacity to even eat the margins. Um,
and they have like generally tended not
to do as long-term agreements on memory.
Um, and why this is like a big deal is
if smartphone volumes, let's say half,
the halfing will frankly happen in the
low and mid-range, not in the high end.
So, it's not like the bits released are
halfing, right? Um, you know, currently
consumer is more than half of memory um
demand. Even if you half the smartphone
volumes because of the shape of the
halfing, right? It's like low-end gets
cut by more than half. High-end gets cut
by less than half because you and I will
buy, you know, the high-end phones that
cost north of $1,000, we'll buy them
even if they get a little bit more
expensive. And Apple's volumes will not
go down as much as like a low-end
smartphone provider. And and the same
applies to PCs. And what this does to
the market is quite drastic, right? Um
DRAM gets released goes to AI chips who
are willing to do longer term contracts,
willing to pay higher margins, etc.,
etc. because at the end of the day, the
margin that they extract is much larger
from the end user or whatever. Um, and
so this this this probably leads to like
people hating AI even more, right?
Because they're going to start being
like, "Today you already see all the
memes like uh on on like PC subreddits
and PC like Twitter, gaming PC Twitter
is like, you know, cat dancing videos
and it's like this is why memory prices
is doubled and you can't get a new
gaming GPU, right? or you can't get a
new uh desktop and and and it's going to
be even worse when memory prices double
again, especially DRAM. Another dynamic
that's quite interesting is it's not
just DRAM, it's also NAND. Um NAND is
also going up in price. Both of these
markets have expanded capacity very
slowly over the last few years. Um NAND
almost zero, but smartphones uh the
percentage of NAND that goes to phones
and PCs is larger than the percentage of
DRAM that goes to phone and PC. So as
you destroy demand, you unlock more, you
know, mostly for the DRM purposes, you
unlock more NAND that gets allocated uh
and can can sort of go to other markets
and so the price increases of DRAM will
be larger than those of NAND because
you've released more from the consumer.
Uh and in fact, you've produced more
memory for AI.
>> Sorry, but the NAND is I maybe just
explained it and I missed it. Is it is
it because SSDs are being used in large
quantities for data centers or
>> they are but not as large quantity
quantities as DRM? Okay. But so you're
saying they they will also increase
because they're using some quantity, but
like there's not as much a need as there
is for HBM. Makes sense. Um, one thing I
didn't appreciate until I was reading
some of your newsletters is that um,
basically the same constraints that are
preventing logic scaling uh, over the
next few years or it's it's quite
similar to what's preventing us from
producing more memory wafers. In fact,
like literally the same exact machine,
this EUV tool is needed for memory. So I
I guess yeah maybe there's a question
that somebody could be asking right now
like well why can't we just make more
memory
>> is that somebody you [laughter]
>> yeah who knows
>> so I think the constraints as I was
mentioning earlier are not necessarily
EV tools today or to next year um they
they become that as we get to the latter
part of the decade uh but currently
right the constraints are more so they
physically just haven't built fabs right
so over the last 3 to four years these
vendors have just not built new fabs um
that's because memory prices were really
low. Um their margins were low and in
fact they were losing money in 2023 on
memory. Um so they were like, "Oh, we're
not building new fabs." And then like
the market slowly recovered over time,
but never really got amazing until last
year. Um you know, in 2024 we were like
banging on the drums that like, hey,
reasoning means long context, which
means large KV cache, which means you
need a lot of memory demand. Um and
we've been talking about that for like a
year and a half, two years. Um, and
people who understand AI like went
really long memory then, right? Um, you
know, and so you've seen that sort of
like dynamic, but now it finally played
out in pricing. It took so long for what
was obvious, right? Hey, long context.
KV cache gets bigger. You need more
memory and accelerators half their cost
is memory. So, of course, they're just
going to start, you know, they can
they're going to start like going crazy
on it. Um, it took a year for that to
actually reflect in memory prices. Once
memory price is reflected, then it took
another 6 months, three months for the
memory vendors to start building fabs.
And those fabs take two years to build.
And so we don't have really meaningful
fabs that you can even put these tools
in until 20 late 27 or 28, right? Um,
and so instead, what you've seen is like
some really crazy stuff to get capacity,
right? Uh, Micron bought a fab from a
company in Taiwan that makes lagging
edge chips, right? Um,
Heinix and Samsung are doing, you know,
some pretty crazy things to try and
expand capacity at their existing fabs,
uh, that also have like very large
knock-on effects in the economy. And so,
hey, why can't we build more capacity is
like there's nowhere to put the tools,
right? And it's not just EUV, there's
other tools involved in DRAM and logic,
right? Like logic, you know, N3% or so
of the cost, you know, 28% of the cost
is EUV of the wafer of the final wafer.
When you look at like DRAM, it's it's
it's in the teens. Um, and it's going
up, but it's in the teens. So, it's as
much smaller percentage of the cost as
DRM or as EUV. These other tools are
also bottlenecks, although their supply
chains are not as complex as ASMLs. Um,
>> and so you see applied materials and
lamb research and all these other
companies also expanding capacity a lot.
And
>> anyways, you don't have anywhere to put
the tool because the most complex
building that people make is fabs and
fabs take two years to build. You can
think of Jane Street as a research lab
with a trading desk attached. Their
infrastructure team has built some of
the biggest research clusters in the
world with tens of thousands of high-end
GPUs and hundreds of thousands of CPU
cores and exabytes of storage. This
compute is part of how Jane Street
surfaces all the hidden patterns that
are embedded in incredibly noisy market
data. Even beyond the noise, the nature
of the signal changes constantly in
reaction to things like pandemics and
elections and new regulations and even
changes in sentiment. There's this
unremitting game of trying to figure out
whether your old models still reflect
the real world and if not, what to do
about it. If you're interested in
working on this sort of thing, Jane
Street is hiring ML researchers and
engineers. They're also accepting
applications for their summer ML
internship program with spots in London,
New York, and Hong Kong. And if you
happen to find yourself at GTC, which is
happening the week after this episode
drops, Jane Street's GPU performance
team is giving a talk. Go to
janstreet.com/swash
to learn more.
Uh I interviewed Elon recently and his
whole plan is that I guess they're going
to build this gigafab terraab some power
of 10 and they're going to they're going
to build the clean rooms. I won't even
ask you about the dirty rooms thing but
like let's say they build the clean
rooms. Um and for okay I have a couple
questions. One
do you think this is the kind of thing
that Elon Co could build much faster
than people are conventionally building
it? This is not about building the end
tools. This is just about building the
facility itself. How complicated is it
to just build a clean room and do it
extremely fast? Is this something that
like Elon with this move fast thing
could do much faster if that's what
we're bottlenecked on this year or next
year? And two, um, does that even matter
if in two years your view is that we're
not bottlenecked on clean room space but
we're bottlenecked on the tooling?
>> So I think I think you know as with any
complex supply chain it takes time and
constraints shift over time and even if
something isn't any longer a constraint
that doesn't mean that market no longer
has margin, right? So, for example, um
energy will not be a big bottleneck as
we get to, you know, a couple years from
now. Um but that doesn't mean energy is
not growing super fast and there's no
margin there. It's just like it's not
the key bottleneck. And in the space of
fabs, right, clean rooms are the biggest
bottleneck this year and next year. Um
and as we get over time, 29, you know,
28, 29, 30, there will be still
constraints there. The thing about Elon
is I think he's had an a tremendous
capability to garner physical resources
and really smart people to build things.
And the way he's able to recruit really
amazing people is just try and build the
craziest stuff, right? In the case of
AI, that's not really worked because
everyone's trying to build AGI,
everyone's very ambitious. But in the
case of like we're going to make, you
know, we're going to go to Mars, we're
going to make rockets that land
themselves or we're going to make fully
autonomous cars that are electric,
right? Um or we're going to make
humanade robots, right? Like these are
methods of recruiting the people who
think that's the most important problem
in the world to work on that problem
because he's the only one trying really
hard. In the case of semiconductors, I
want to make a fab that's a million
wafers per month. No one has a fab that
big. That's what he stated, right? He
wants to make a million wafers a month.
You know, it's possible that he's able
to recruit a lot of really awesome
people and get them on this heroically,
you know, this crazy task of trying to
build a fab that does a million wafers
per month. Step one is to build the
clean room. And I think that he probably
can do, right? I think, you know,
there's some mindset, you know, his his
mindset around like delete things. It
can be dirty. It's fine. Probably not
right. Or actually, I I think 100% it's
not right. You like need the fab to be
very clean. I think the entire air the
entire all of the air in the fab gets
replaced like every 3 seconds. It's like
that fast and there's so few particles
per but I think he can build the uh
clean room. It'll take a year or two.
Maybe initially it won't be super fast,
but then over time you'll get faster and
faster at it. But then the really
complex part is actually developing the
process technology and building wafers.
And I don't think he can develop that uh
quickly. I think that has a lot of
built-up knowledge. It's again like the
most complicated like integration of
very expensive tools and supply chain
that's done is a TSMC or an Intel or a
Samsung. And those some of the these two
other two companies aren't even that
great and they're like tremendously
complex. How how surprised would you be
if in 2030 people like there there just
happened to be some total disruption
where we're not using UV, we're using
something that has like much better
effects, much simpler to produce, we can
produce in much bigger quantities. I'm
sure as an industry insider that sounds
like a totally naive question, but do
you see what I'm asking? Like is it like
what probability should we put on oh
something totally out of the left field
comes out and none of this is relevant?
something that's very simple and easy to
scale. I have very very low probability
for uh there are a number of companies
working on effectively like particle
accelerators or synatrons that generate
light that's either 13.5 nmter like EUV
or even uh X-ray like even even uh
narrower wavelength like 7 nmter
whatever wavelengths of light to then
use in lithography tools but those
things are like massive particle
accelerators that are then generating
this light it's a very complicated thing
to build so there's a couple companies
and I think that could be a big
disruption to the industry uh beyond
what EUV is I don't necessarily
necessarily think that like we're going
to just magically build something new
that is like direct right and super
simple um and can be manufactured at
huge volumes although there are some
attempts to do things like this
>> yeah because I asked because if you
think about Elon codes in the past
rocketry was this thing that thought I
mean it is incredibly complicated
>> look I'm just a naive yapper compared to
Elon right what have I built [laughter]
so maybe it's possible right
>> yeah yeah um in order to be able to
build more memory in the future could
build uh 3D DRM the way we do 3D NAND
and then go back to DUV.
>> Um this is the hope currently everyone's
road map for 3DM is that you'll still
use EUV um because you want to have that
tighter overlay because now when you're
doing these subsequent processing steps
you want it to be you know everything's
vertically stacked you have more layers
on top of each other um and you want the
pitches to be tighter and all these
things. So, so generally people are
still trying to do an EUV but what 3D
would do is it would take the co you
know hey a single EUV pass how many bits
can it make right if you do this sort of
like calculation and that number would
go up drastically if you go to 3D RAM
>> that is the hope but right now
everyone's road map is sort of like you
go from current uh it's called a 6F
square uh cell to a 4F uh cell and then
finally 3D RAM like by the end of the
decade or early next decade. So there's
still like a lot of R&D and
manufacturing and integration to be
done. Um, I wouldn't call that out of
the cards. I think it's very much likely
going to happen. It also is going to
require a huge retooling of fabs, right?
The the breakdown of tools in a fab are
very different, right? Actually, the
lithography tool is the only thing that
isn't like that different, but the
number of them relative to different
types of chemical vapor deposition or
atomic layer deposition or uh dry etch
or different kinds of etch chambers with
different chemistries, all of these
things. You have all these different
kinds of tools for different process
nodes. You can't just like convert a
logic fab to a DRM fab or vice versa
back and forth or a nanfab to a dm fab
in in a short amount of time. And in the
same way existing dramabs
require a lot of retooling just to go
from 1b or one alpha to one beta to one
gamma process nodes because now they
have to add deuv and change the uh
chemistry stacks for when you're using
EUV and in terms of deposition and etch
and the EUV tool has to be there. And
furthermore, like when you change to 3D
RAM, there's going to be an even larger
shift. And so there's a lot of retooling
of these fabs that needs to happen um in
terms of the tools. And so that would be
a big disruption. Um that would make EUV
demand generally lower. But as we've
seen across time, EUV demand as a
percentage of wafer cost has trended up.
Initially or lithography, right?
lithography initially I want to say in
like 2014ish era was like 16% of the
wafer cost 17% and it's gone to 30 over
the last you know 15 years um and for DM
it was in the mid- teens as well or low
teens and now it's trended towards the
high teens um and before we get to 3D
it'll likely cross into the 20s
percentage range but then if we get to
3D it tanks again in terms of the total
end wafer cost as a percentage of EUV
>> yeah I I guess you care less about like
the percent of cost and more about how
much it bottlenecks Right. But the
percentage of cost is sort of
>> a proxy. Yeah. Yeah. Um so if you're uh
if you're Jensen or Sam Waltman or
whoever who's stands to gain a lot from
scaling up AI compute um there's these
stories that they'd go to TSMC and say
hey why can't we X Y and Z. Um but I
think the point you're making here is
it it doesn't really matter in some
sense what TSMC does. And in fact, even
if you have Intel and Samsung building
more foundaries in in the long run,
you're going to be bottlenecked by ASML
and other tool mmakers and other
material makers. So first, is that
correct interpretation? And second, then
why should basically switch Silicon
Valley people be going to the
Netherlands to try to pitch as like
right now should they be trying to pitch
ASML to make more tools so that like in
2030 they can have more EI compute?
>> You know, it's it's a funny dynamic. We
saw in 23 24 uh and 2025 people who saw
the energy bottleneck before others
asymmetrically went to you know uh
Seammens Mitsubishi and of course G
Vernova and bought up turbine capacity
and now they're able to charge excess
amounts for deploying these turbines uh
places because of energy and in the same
sense this could be done for EUV except
ASML is not just going to trust any
random bozo who wants to buy EUV tools
um in the sense that like you know these
turbines much cheaper than EUV tools and
there's many more of them produced,
right? Especially once you like get to
like industrial gas turbines or like you
know not not just combine cycle but like
the cheaper, smaller, etc. less
efficient ones. People put down deposits
for these. So in a sense someone could
do this, right? Someone should go to the
Netherlands and be like I'll pay you a
billion dollars. You give me the right
to purchase 10 EUV tools two years from
now, right? And I I have I'm first in
line two years from now. Um, and then
over those two years, you then go around
and wait for everyone to realize, "Oh
crap, I don't have enough EUV tools."
And then you try and sell your option at
some premium, but all you're effectively
doing is you're saying, "ASML, you're
dumb. You weren't making enough margin
on these. I'm going to make a margin."
And the question is like, "Will ASML
even agree to this, right?" And I'm
like,
>> "I don't think so." Right.
>> So, but like there's a world where they
at least like get the demand signal from
that to increase production
>> potentially. Potentially, I agree. Um,
>> but it sounds like you're saying, "Oh,
they couldn't even increase production
if they wanted to given the That's
exactly the market in which if they
can't increase production just like TSMC
cannot increase production that fast and
yet demand is mooning then the obvious
solution is to arbitrage this because
you and I know demand is way higher than
their they're projecting and their
capability to build. So then you
arbitrage this by locking up the
capacity and then sort of doing like a
forward contract and and and then trying
to sell it at a later date once other
people realize actually [__] everything
is [__] and we don't have enough
capacity and then you'll have like this
insane margin that ASML and TSMC should
have been charging. But the thing is I
don't know if ASML and TSMC will ever
agree to this.
>> Um okay let let me ask about power now.
So it sounds like you think power can be
arbitrarily scaled. um not arbitrarily
but yes
>> but be beyond these numbers and um I
think if I'm remembering correctly your
blog post on the power uh how I love
increasing power you were like where you
were implying that uh Gio Vernova and
Mitsubishi and Simons could produce and
gas turbines was like 60 gawatt a year
and then there's these other sources but
they're like less significant than the
the turbines and so
and only a fraction of that goes to AI I
assume So yeah, if in 2030 we have
enough logic and memory to do 200
gawatts a year, is it do do you just
think that these things are on a path to
ramp up to more than 200 gawatts a year
or what do you see?
>> Yeah. So I mean I mean right now we're
at 30, right? Um or 20 20 20. So this is
critical IT capacity by the way, right?
This is an important thing to mention.
When I'm talking about these gigawatts,
I'm talking about critical IT capacity
server plugged in. That's how much power
it pulls. But there's losses along the
chain, right? There is loss on the
transmission. And there's losses on the
conversion, uh there's losses on
cooling, etc. And so you should gross
this factor up, you know, from 20
gawatts for this year or 200 gawatt by
the end of the decade, um to some number
20 30% higher. And then you have
capacity factors, right? Turbines don't
run at 100%. In fact, like if you look
at PGM, uh, which is the largest grid I
think in America, um, sort of the
Midwest sort of northeast kind of
areaish, not not the full Northeast, but
anyways, PGM, they rate in their models
for like, hey, turbines, how much
capacity we want to have excess, you
know, roughly 20% capacity. Uh, in
addition in that 20% excess capacity,
we're running all the turbines at 90%.
Because they are derated some for
reliability, oh, things go down,
maintenance, etc., etc., etc. So then in
reality the name plate capacity for uh
energy is always way higher than the
actual end critical IT capacity because
of all of these factors.
>> Um but it's not just turbines right?
>> If you were just making power from
turbines like that's simple, boring,
easy, right? Um we're, you know, humans
and capitalism is far more effective.
And so the whole point of that blog was
yes, there's only three people making
combine cycle gas turbines, but there's
so much more we can do, right? We can do
aerodyivatives, right? we can take
airplane engines and turn them into uh
turbines as well. And there's even new
entrance in the market like boom
supersonic's trying to do that, right?
And they're working with Cruso and and
also there's all the other ones like
that already exist in the market.
There's um there's medium speed
reciprocating engines, right? Engines
that spin in circles, right? So sort of
like any diesel engine, right? There's
like 10 people who make engines that
way, right? So Cumins, you know, you
know, at least I'm from Georgia and we
we you know, people used to be like, "Oh
man, you got a Cumins engine in there."
um you know like you know regarding Ram
trucks but it's like well actually auto
automobiles manufacturing is going down
these companies all have capacity and
could scale and convert that to for data
center power right stick all these
reciprocating engines yes it's not as
clean as combine cycle maybe you can you
can convert them from diesel to to gas
if you want um but at the end of the day
these spinning engines oh what about
ship engines right all of these engines
for these massive cargo ships those are
great Nebus is doing that for a data
center in micro for Microsoft um in New
Jersey right they're running these ship
engines to generate power. Oh, there's
um you know, Bloom Energy is doing fuel
cells. We've been like very positive on
them for like a year and a half now. Um
because they have like such a cap
capability to increase their production.
Um and their payback period for
production increase is like very fast.
Even if the cost is a little bit higher
than combine cycle, which is like the
best cost and efficiency. Um you know,
and then and then there's solar plus
battery, which as these cost curves
continue to come down, those can come
online. there's wind and you know of
course the derating of those you know
hey when you put on a wind turbine you
might say oh I'm only going to expect
15% of the maximum power because things
just oscillate but you add batteries
there's all these things and then the
other thing is that like the grid is
scaled for um you know hey we are not
going to cut off power at peak usage
which is like the hottest day in the
summer um
but in reality that's a load spike that
is 10 15 20% higher than the average
well if you just put enough utility
scale batteries or you put peaker plants
that only run a small portion of the
year. Then all of a sudden, you know,
and those could be gas, they could be
industrial gas turbines, they could be
combine cycle, they could be any of the
other sources of power I mentioned. Um,
they could be batteries. Then all of a
sudden, you've unlocked 20% of the US
grid for data centers because most of
the times that capacity is sitting idle
and it's really only there for that
peak, right? Which is a day or two,
right? And it's a few hours of like
maybe a few a few days of the full year
is that peak. And so you just have
enough capacity to absorb that that peak
load and all of a sudden you've
transferred it all. And today data
centers only 3 4% of the power of the US
grid and by 28 they'll be 10%. But if
you can just unlock 20% of the US grid
like this like it's like not that crazy.
Um you know and and the US grid is
terowatt level not hundreds of gigawatts
level right so we we can add a lot more
energy. It's not easy. I'm not saying
it's easy. These things aren't going to
be hard. There's a lot of hard
engineering. There's a lot of risks that
people have to take. There's a lot of
new technologies people have to use, but
Elon was the first to do this behind the
meter gas. Um, and since then we've seen
an explosion of different things that
people are doing to get power and
they're not easy, but people are going
to be able to do them and the supply
chains are just way more simple than
chips.
>> Interesting. So, I I guess he made the
point during the interview that the
specific blade for the specific turbine
he was looking at, the lead times for
that go out beyond 2030. And your point
is that
>> that's great. There's so many other ways
to make energy. Like just be
inefficient. Like it's fine,
>> right? So you're like right now I guess
combined cycle gas turbines have
capbacks of $1,500 per kilowatt and
you're saying you could just it would
make sense to have either technologies
that are much more expensive than that
or other things are getting cheap enough
to that to make it competitive.
>> Exactly. Exactly. You know, it can be as
high as $3,500 per kilowatt uh even.
Right. So it could be twice as much as
the cost of combine cycle and the total
cost of the GPU you know you know on a
TCO basis has gone up a few cents per
hour right again if we're because we've
been talking about uh hopper pricing
$140 now becomes you know oh the power
price doubles okay the hopper that was
$140 is now $150 in cost it's like
>> oh I don't care because the models are
improving so fast that the marginal
utility of them is worth way more than
that 10-centent increase in energy.
Okay. And then so you're saying 20% of
the grid so winter what about uh 20% of
that can just come online from utility
scale batteries increasing um what you
would be comfortable putting
>> regulatory mechanism there is like not
easy by the way
>> but like that's 200 gawatt like if that
hypothetically happens but you're saying
on just from the different sources of
gas generation you mentioned the
different kinds of engines and turbines
um combined how how many gigawatts could
they unlock by the end of the decade?
>> Yeah. So we're we're tracking uh in some
of our data where all you know there's
over 16 different manufacturers of power
generating uh things just from gas
alone, right? So you know yes there's
only three turbine manufacturers for
combine cycle um but we're tracking 16
different vendors and we have all of
their orders and things like that and it
turns out there is just hundreds of
gigawatts of orders to various data
centers. As we get to the end of the
decade we think like something like half
of the capacity that's being added will
be behind the meter. Um, and when we
look at like a lot of this is actually
behind the meter is almost always more
expensive than grid connected, but
there's just a lot of problems with
getting grid connected and uh, you know,
permits and interconnection cues and all
this sort of stuff. So, ends up being
>> even though it's more expensive, people
are doing behind the meter and then what
they're doing behind the meter with
>> ranges widely, right? It could be
reciprocating engines, it could be ship
engines, it could be a derivatives, it
could be combine cycle, although combine
cycle is not that great for behind the
meter. Um, it could be uh bloom energy
fuel cells. It could be solar plus
battery, right? Like it could be any of
these things.
>> You're saying any of these individually
could do like tens of gigawatts.
>> Any of these individually will do tens
of gigawatts and in a whole they will do
hundreds of gigawatts.
>> Okay. So that that alone should more
than um
>> I mean it's going to take I mean like
electrician wages probably double or
triple again, right? And like there's
going to be a lot of new people entering
that field and there's going to be a ton
of people who make money. But it is
something that I don't like I don't see
that as the main bottleneck. Right.
>> So right now in Abene the 1.2 gawatt uh
data center that um Cruso is building
for OpenAI uh I think they have like
5,000 people working there or at peak
they had did um and if you turn that
into um
100 gawatt and I'm sure things will get
more efficient over time but that would
be like 400k people it would take to
build 100 gawatt. And if you think about
the US labor force of how many
electricians there are, how many
construction workers there are. Yeah, I
guess there's like 800k electricians. Uh
I don't know if they're all
substitutable in this way. There's
millions of construction workers. But if
if we're in a world where we're adding
200 gawatts a year, are we going to be
crunched on labor eventually or do you
think that is actually not a real
constraint?
>> So, so labor is a humongous constraint
in this. People have to be trained. Uh
likewise, we probably start importing
the highest skilled at labor in this in
this way, right? Because now it makes
sense that, you know, hey, a really
high-skilled electrician in Europe who
was working on destroying power plants
now comes to America and is building
data center uh you know, high voltage
electricity, you know, power moving
across the data center, right? Something
like this, right? um humanoid robots
maybe start to or robotics at least
start to but the main factor is going to
be for reducing the number of people is
modularizing things and making them in
factories in Asia um unfortunately but
you know at least for America but you
know Korea um Southeast Asia in in many
ways China as well but you know the
these areas are going to do are are
going to ship more and more built out uh
um built out sections of the data center
and those will be shipped in, right?
Maybe today you, you know, you currently
ship servers in or a rack in and then
you plug that into, you know, different
pieces that you're shipping from
different places, but now you'll ship it
to a factory and integrate the entire,
you know, hey, maybe this is a 2
megawatt block. And this block goes
from, you know, high voltage power to uh
the, you know, the voltage power that
you the voltage and uh and maybe DC that
you deliver to the rack um instead of
being AC and high voltage, right? Or
something like this, right? or cooling.
You take you you ship a fully integrated
thing that has a lot of the cooling
subsystems already put together. Or
because plumbers are also a big
constraint here. Or furthermore, you
take instead of just a single rack and
now you have people wiring up all these
racks of power and electricity and blah
blah blah blah blah, you take a skid and
you put an entire row of ex of of
servers and that is shipped from the
factories. Um and and today a single
rack may be 120 140 kilowatts but as we
get to you know next generation you know
Nvidia Kyber and things like that it's
almost a megawatt and then in addition
if you do an entire row it'll have the
the rack it'll have the networking and
it'll have the cooling and the power
racks all integrated together. So now
when you come in actually you you have
much less stuff to cable whether it be
um networking with fiber whether it be
um the power right there's fewer power
that power things to connect and then
there's fewer plumbing things to connect
right and so this drastically can reduce
the amount of people working in data
centers and therefore the capability to
build these will be much larger and
along the way there will be you know new
things mean you know some people move
faster to new things some people move
slower right and Google have been
talking a lot about this moduleization
as people like Meta and you know many
others right have been talking a lot
about this mod and others are going to
be slower to doing it but at the end of
the day you know and and and people who
move faster to new things may have more
delays or people who are slower have
labor problems so there will always be
dislocations in the market because this
is a very complex supply chain at the
end of the day it's still simple enough
that we will be able to solve it through
capitalism and human ingenuity uh on the
time scales that are required
>> yeah okay so speaking of um uh big
problems to solve. I um uh Elon Musk is
very bullish on space GPUs. If you're
right that power is not a constraint on
Earth, I guess the other reason they
would make sense is that even though you
can phys
enough gas turbines or whatever to build
it on Earth, I think Elon's next
argument then is like you can't get the
permitting to build hundreds of
gigawatts on Earth. Do you buy that
argument?
>> Landwise, it's pretty America's big
there does data centers don't take that
much space. You can you could solve
that. Um, permitting wise, air pollution
permits are a challenge, but the Trump
administration's made it much easier.
You go to Texas and you can skip a lot
of this red tape. Uh, and so, you know,
Elon Elon had to deal with a lot of like
this complex stuff in Memphis and then
building a power plant across the
border. Um, and all these things for
Colossus 1 and two, but at the end of
the day, there's a lot more you can get
away with in the middle of Texas, right?
>> But why, given that Elon lives in Texas,
why didn't he just go to Texas? I think
I think it was partially like they
overindexed on grid power for a
temporary period of time, right? Because
that's just what they they thought they
needed more of.
>> They said an aluminum refinery connected
to the grid there.
>> Uh no, it's a it was a it was an
appliance factory that was that was uh
idled.
>> Um
but I think they may have indexed more
to what was grid power. They may have
indexed more to like water access and
gas access because actually I think they
bought that knowing that the gas line
was right there and they were going to
tap it. Same with water. Um it was a
whole host of different constraints. It
was probably an area where electricians
and things like that were easier to
find. But at the end of the day, I'm not
exactly sure why they chose that site. I
bet Elon would have chosen somewhere in
Texas if he could have like gone back.
But yeah, because of the regulatory
faces he's ch he's challenges he's
faced.
It's it's it's ultimately like
permitting is a challenge, but America
is a big place and there are 50 states
and things will get done and there are a
lot of small jurisdictions where you can
just transport in all the workers that
you need for a temporary period of 6
months to a year. um depending on the
type of contractor it can be even 3
months for depending on the type of
contractor uh that's coming in and put
them in temporary housing pay out the
butt because labor is very cheap
relative to the GPUs and the power or
not the power but the GPUs and the like
the networking and so on and so forth
and the end value of the tokens it's
going to produce so all of these things
have plenty of room to like be paid for
um and so I think it's fine right you
you and also people are diversifying now
right Australia uh Malaysia Indonesia
IA, India, these are all places where
data centers are going up at a much
faster pace. But currently still 70%
plus of the AI data centers are in
America and that continues to be the
trend. And so I think people are
figuring out how to build these things
and permitting like I I just like
ultimately like permitting and red tape
in middle of nowhere Texas or middle of
nowhere Wyoming or middle of nowhere
like New Mexico is probably a hell of a
lot easier than sending stuff into
space,
>> right? Well, other than the fact that
the economic argument uh makes less
sense once you consider the fact that
energy is a small fraction of the cost
of ownership of a data center, what are
the other reasons you're skeptical?
>> Yeah. So, obviously power is free in
space basically. Uh
>> no, that's the reason to do it.
>> Yeah, that's the reason to do it. But
then there's all the other counter
arguments, right? Which is because even
if power costs double, you're still at a
fraction of the total cost of the GPU.
the the main challenges is
and what we've seen that disperses right
we have cluster max which rates all the
neoclouds and we test them we test over
40 cloud companies including the
hyperscalers and neoclouds what
differentiates some of these clouds the
most outside of software is their
ability to deploy and manage failure
right GPUs are horrendously unreliable
uh even today 15% of black wells or so
that get deployed have to be RMA you
have to take them out you have to you
know maybe just plug them and plug them
back in but sometimes you have to take
them ship them to Nvidia or rather their
partners who do these RMAs and such. Um
>> what do you make of El's kind of
argument that once you have the initial
um after an initial phase they actually
don't fail that much.
>> Sure. But now you've you've done this,
you've tested them all, you
deconstructed them, put them on a
spaceship, [__] put them into space,
and then put them online again. That's
months, right? And if your argument is
that, you know, hey, GPUs have a useful
life of X years, right? If a GPU has a
useful life of 5 years and it takes
three additional months, probably six,
let's say six additional months, then
that is 10% of your cluster's useful
life. And because we're so capacity
constrained, that compute is most
valuable theoretically in the first 6
months you have it because we're more
constrained now than in the future
because that compute now can contribute
to a better model in the future or
contribute to revenue now which you can
use to raise more money to get better,
you know, all these all these sorts of
things. Now is always the most important
moment. And so you've delayed your
compute deployment by 6 months
potentially. And and the thing that
separates these clouds is we see clouds
that take six months to deploy GPUs
today on Earth, right? We see clouds
that take a lot less than six months,
right? And so the question is where does
space get in there? I don't see how you
would test them all on Earth,
deconstruct them and ship ship them and
shoot them into space
>> and it not take longer than just putting
them in the spot that you were testing
them.
>> Yeah. So the question I wanted to ask is
the topology of space communication. So
um right now uh Starlink satellites talk
to each other at 100 g gabits per second
and you can imagine that being much
higher with optical uh inner satellite
laser links that are optimized for this.
Um and that actually ends up being like
quite close to the infiniband bandwidth
which is like 400 gigabytes a second.
Right.
>> But that's per GPU not per rack.
>> I see. Okay.
>> So so multiply that by 72 also like that
was Hopper. when you go to Blackwell and
Ruben that two X's and two X's again.
>> All right. But but how much compute is
happening per um like during inference
are the different scaleups still working
together or is it just happening it's a
batch within a single scaleup?
>> Um a lot of models fit within one
scaleup domain but many times you split
them across multiple scaleup domains. I
think that
you really have to uh as models become
more and more sparse at least this is
like the general trend then you want to
you know ping just a couple experts per
GPU and if leading models today have
hundreds if not thousand experts then
you want to run this across hundreds of
chips or thousands of chips um even as
we continue to advance into the future
and so then you end up with this problem
of
>> well now you need to you need to connect
all these satellites together coms wise
as well. Okay. So that would be tough
because I was imagining if there's a
world where you could like do a batch
inference for a batch on a single uh
scale up then maybe it's more plausible
but if not then it's it's
>> networking these trips together is a
problem and and you can't just make this
the satellite infinitely large right
like there are a lot of challenges with
physics to making a satellite really big
right so then these inter that's why you
need these inner interconnects between
the satellites those interconnects are
more expensive than the you know a
cluster like 20% of the cost or 15% of
the cost is networking. All of a sudden,
now you're making it like space lasers
instead of like pretty simple like
lasers that are manufactured in millions
of volumes with, you know, pluggable
transceivers. And those things are very
unreliable as well. More unreliable than
the GPUs, by the way, across the life of
a cluster. You have to unplug, clean it
all the time, right? Um unplug, replplug
it just for random reasons. These things
are just not as reliable. So you've got
that also that problem as well. like
you've got a more expensive complicated
space laser to communicate instead of
this pluggable optical transceiver
that's been in super high volume.
>> Okay. So, all in all, what does that
imply for space data centers?
>> So, space data centers effectively are
not li limited by, you know, hey, we
have this energy advantage. It's
actually just limited by the same
contended resource. We can only make 200
gawatts of chips a year by the end of
the decade. So, what are we going to do
to get that capacity? It doesn't matter
if it's on land or uh in in in space.
You you're it doesn't really matter,
right? Because you can build that power.
And I think human capabilities and
capacity to could get to the uh period
where we're adding a terowatt a year
globally of of various types of power.
At some point, we do cross the chasm
where space data centers make sense, but
it's not this decade, right? It is it is
much further out once you have energy
constraints actually being a big
bottleneck. Once you have space, land,
permitting be a much bigger bottleneck
as it subsumes more and more of the
economy. Um, and and chips are no longer
the bottleneck because chips are the
biggest bottleneck. And so you want them
deployed working on AI the moment
they're done being manufactured. And so
there's a lot of things people are doing
to increase that speed faster and
faster, whether it be modulizing data
centers or even modulizing racks where
you actually put the chip in at the f at
the data center, but only the chip and
everything else is already wired up and
ready to go at the data center. So
there's things like this that people are
doing to decrease that time that you
cannot do in space. And at the end of
the day, all that matters in a chip
constrained world is get these chips
working on tok producing tokens ASAP. in
a world, you know, maybe 2035 once the
semiconductor industry and ASML and
Zeiss and all these other suppliers, L
research applied materials, fab
manufacturers, like pendulum swings and
they're able to make enough chips and
really we're optimizing every dial and
like it makes sense to optimize the 10%
of energy costs or 15% of energy cost or
as we move to A6 potentially uh and
Nvidia's margins aren't 70 plus% maybe
that energy cost is 30% of the cluster
um and fab construction all this like
these the things our data center
construction these are the things to
optimize but that's not a you know Elon
doesn't win by doing
you know 20% gains Elon never wins that
way Elon wins when he swings for the
fences and does 10x gains right that's
what SpaceX is about that's what Tesla
was about that's what all of his success
has been about right it's not been about
these chasing the 20% so I think I think
space data centers will eventually be a
10x gain uh potentially as as earth
resources get more and more contentious
but that's not this decade
>> yeah I I mean I I think just to drive
some intuition about how much land there
is on earth um obviously the chips
themselves especially if we move to a
world where you have racks that are
megawatt megawatt charge like literally
it's not even a ring factor
>> that's the other thing right the power
dens you know if chips are and
manufacturing is the constraint right
now roughly it's one watt per millimeter
squared uh for AI chips and such
>> one easy way is to pump that to two
watts per millimeter squared now you may
not get 2x the performance you may only
get 20% more performance and that
requires much more exotic cooling,
right? It requires uh more complicated
cold plates and very complicated liquid
cooling and or maybe it requires like
things like immersion cooling. But in
space, higher watts per millimeter is
very difficult. Whereas on Earth, these
are solved problems. And one of these
things enables you to get a lot more
tokens. Maybe it's 20% more tokens per
wafer that's manufactured. And that's a
humongous way.
>> So by millimeter, you mean of die area?
>> Yeah, of di area. Square millimeters of
a die area. Yeah, I I mean it would be
better for space because if you can run
more watts per millimeter would be the
chip runs hotter and the hotter the
chip. I guess this is a question of
computer chip engineering but but it
like it cools to the power of fourth by
Stefan Boltzman's law. So if you can run
a very hot chip because you can't run it
hotter, you can only run it denser
>> and the problem is getting the heat out
of that dense area means you have to
move away from standard air cooling and
liquid cooling to more exotic forms of
liquid cooling or even immersion to get
to higher uh power densities. And that's
more difficult in space than it is on
Earth.
>> Yeah. And maybe it's at this point worth
uh explaining what what what exactly a
scaleup is and what it looks like for
Nvidia versus um Tranium versus um
versus uh TPUs.
>> Yeah. So earlier I was mentioning how
communication within a chip is super
fast. Communication within chips that
are in the same rack is fast but is not
as fast. And then you know it's on the
order of terabytes. And then
communication very far away is on the
order of gigabyte, hundreds of
gigabytes, right? So this this order of
magnitude as you get further distance
compute and maybe across the country
it's on the order of gigabytes a second,
right? Scale up domain is this like
tight domain um where the chips are
communicating on the order of terabytes
a second. And so for Nvidia previously
this meant an H100 server had eight GPUs
and those eight GPUs could talk to each
other at terabytes a second. With
Blackwell NVL72, they implemented rack
scale scale up and that meant all 72
GPUs in the rack would connect to could
connect to each other at terabytes a
second speed and and the speed double
gen on gen. But also the most important
innovation they did was going from 8 to
72 in the domain. When we look at
Google, their scaleup domain is
completely different. Right? It is
always been on the order of thousands,
right? With TPU v4, they had pods the
size of 4,000 chips. With V8, they have
pods even at, you know, or V7, they have
pods in the 7,000 or sorry, 8,000 9,000
range. Um, and what's relevant here is
that it's not it's not the same as
Nvidia. It's not like for like Google
has a topology that's a tourist, right?
So every chip connects to six neighbors
rather than Nvidia the 72 GPUs connect
all to all right so they can send
terabytes a second to each other to any
arbitrary other chip in that pod of
scale up whereas Google you have to
bounce through chips right so this means
if TPU1 needs to talk to TPU76 then it
has to bounce through various chips and
there is always some blocking of
resources when you do that so because
that one TPU is only connected to six
other TPUs and so there's a difference
in topology and bandwidth with. And
there are trade-offs and advantages of
both, right? Google gets to have a
massive scale up domain, but then they
have the trade-off of you have to bounce
across chips to get to from one chip to
another. Um, you can only talk to six
direct neighbors. And so there is like
this trade-off and Amazon has has
mutated their scaleup domain. Uh,
they're somewhere in between Nvidia and
Google effectively where they're trying
to make larger scale up domains. um they
try and do all to all to some extent
which is what with switches which is
what Nvidia does but also to some extent
they use Taurus topologies like Google
does um and as we as we advance forward
to next generations all all three of
them are moving more and more towards uh
a dragonfly topology which means there's
sort of like there is some fully
connected elements and there's some
elements that are not fully connected so
you can get the scale up to be hundreds
or thousands of chips but also have it
not contend for resources when you're
bouncing through chips. related
question.
Um I heard somebody make the claim that
the reason that parameter scaling has
been slow and only now are we getting
bigger and bigger models from uh OpenAI
and Enthropic is that
um so original GP4 is over a trillion
parameters and only now are models
starting to approach that again. Um, and
I heard a theory that the reason is that
Nvidia's scaleups have just not had that
much u uh memory capacity. And so
what was the claim exactly? If you have
say one five, let's you have a 5T model
running at FP8. So that's five uh five
trillion gigabytes.
>> Yeah.
>> And then you have the KV cache. Let's
say it's like
>> just call it the same size.
>> Okay. Let's say it's the same size for
one batch. So you need 10 GB, sorry, 10
terabytes to be able to run
>> a single forward pass. Yeah.
>> And then only with the GB200 and VL72 do
you have an Nvidia scale up that has 20
terabytes and before that they were much
smaller. Whereas Google on the other
hand has had these um huge TPU pods that
are not all to all but still have I
think hundreds of terabytes of capacity
in a single scale up. So does that
explain why parameter scaling has been
slow? I think it's partially the
capacity and bandwidth but also um as
you build a larger model the ability to
deploy it is is is slower right like in
terms of like hey what is the inference
speed um for the end user that's kind of
irrelevant what's really relevant is RL
um and what we've seen with these models
and allocation of compute at a lab is
sort of there's there's a few main ways
you can allocate compute you can
allocate it to inference i.e revenue you
can allocate it to development i.e
making the next model and you can
allocate it to research. Um and in
development specifically you can split
you split it between pre-training and uh
RL right and so when you think about hey
what exactly is happening well the model
the compute efficiency gains you get
from research are so large you actually
want most of your compute to go to
research not to development because you
know all these researchers are
generating new ideas trying them out
testing them and continuing to march
along this and push the prao optimal
curve of scaling laws further and
further and further and at least What
we've seen empirically is like model
cost gets 10x cheaper every year or even
more than that. um which at the same
scale gets 10x cheaper or get you know
at you know to get to reach new
frontiers that cost the same amount or
more right so you don't want to train
you don't want to allocate too many
resources to pre uh to pre-training and
post and RL you actually want to
allocate most of your resources to
research um and then in the middle is a
sort of this like development period if
you pre-train a five trillion parameter
model now you have to spend all this
time how many rollouts do you have to do
in these RLS and these rollouts for a
trillion parameter model versus a 5
trillion parameter model are five times
larger which then means it takes if you
wanted to do as many rollouts maybe the
larger model is more sample efficient
let's say it's 2x more sample efficient
okay great now you need two and a half
as much time of RL to get the model
smarter um or you could RL the smaller
model for 2x the time and you'd be it'd
be you you'd still have a 50% or you'd
still have a 25% difference in the big
model which is 2x more sample efficient
uh and doing x number of rollouts versus
the small model which is a trillion
parameters doing although it's less
sample efficient is doing twice as many
rollouts. It's still done faster and so
you get the model faster sooner and
you've done more RL and then you can
take that model to help you build the
next models, help your engineers train
and do all these research ideas. And so
this feedback loop is actually weighed
towards smaller models in in every case
no matter what your hardware is. And
then as you look to Google, Google does
deploy the largest production model of
any of the the major labs, right? uh
with Gemini Pro it is a larger model
than GPT uh 54. or it's a larger model
than Opus and and so you end up with yes
Google does this because they have a
uniolar set of compute right all almost
all TPU um whereas Enthropic is dealing
with H100's H200's blackwell trreniums
TPUs of various generations right and
and uh openAI is dealing with mostly
Nvidia right now but going towards
having a AMD and tranium as well the
fleets of compute like Google can can
just optim optimize around a larger
model and they can leverage a thousand
chips in a scale up domain to get you
know the RL time speed much faster
so that you can actually uh have this
feedback loop be fast but at the end of
the day in isolation you almost always
want to go with a smaller model that
gets RL faster and gets deployed into
research and development so you can
build the next thing and get more
compute efficiency wins and then this
compounding effect of oh I made a
smaller model that I RL more that I then
deployed into research and development
earlier and I spent less compute on the
training itself because I was able and I
was able to allocate more compute to the
research. This like compounding effect
of being able to do the research faster
and faster and faster is potentially a
faster takeoff and that's all these
companies want is fastest takeoff
possible.
>> Yeah. Um okay, spicy question. Um, you
know, you're explaining you make the
semi analysis sells these spreadsheets
and you're always like, "Ah, six months
ago or a year ago, we told people the
memory crunch or now you're telling
people the clean room crunch and then
the in the future the tool crunch." Um,
why is Leopold the only person that is
using your spreadsheets to make
outrageous money? What is everybody else
doing?
>> I think I think there are a lot of
people making money in many ways. I
think obviously Leopold Leupold jokes
that you know he's the only client of
mine that tells me our numbers are too
low. Everyone else tells me our numbers
are too high. uh almost ad nauseium um
you know whether it's a hyperscaler
saying hey that other hyperscaler their
numbers are too high you know and we're
like no that's it and they're like no no
no no it's impossible blah blah blah and
then you like finally have to convince
them through all these facts and data
when we're working with hyperscalers or
AI labs that in fact no that number
isn't too high um that's correct but
event and eventually like sometimes it's
like six months later it takes them to
realize or a year later um I think I
think other clients like on the trading
side also use our data right we we sell
data to a lot of um you know I think
roughly 60% of my business is industry.
So AI labs, data uh data center
companies, hyperscalers, semiconductor
companies, uh you know, the whole supply
chain across AI infrastructure. Um but
then like 40% of our revenue is like
hedge funds, right? And and you know,
I'm not going to comment on who our
customers are, but I think a lot of
people use the data. It's just how do
you interpret it and then what do you
like view as beyond it? And I will say
Leopold is pretty much the only person
who tells me my numbers are too low
always. Um, and sometimes he's too high,
sometimes I'm too low, right? Uh, but in
general, I think other people are, you
know, doing that and you can check
certain, you can you can look across the
space at hedge funds and look at their
13Fs and see actually they own maybe not
exactly what Leopold does. Uh, because
it's always like a question of like what
is the most constrained thing? What's
the thing that's going to be that's most
outside of expectations? And that's what
you're really trying to exploit is
inefficiencies in the market. And in a
sense what our data shows is like is is
like making the market more efficient by
making the base data uh of what's
happening more accurate versus like and
but but in a sense I think many many
funds do trade on information um that is
out there and it's not I I don't think I
don't think Leopold's the only person I
think he has the most conviction on the
entire uh in the entire like about the
AGI takeoff though. Right.
>> Right. I mean but but the bets are not
about like what happens in 2035. the
bets that you're making that are at
least exemplified by public returns we
can see for different funds including
Leopolds are about what has happened in
the last year and the last year stuff
could be predicted using your
spreadsheets right so it's like it's
it's less about
>> it's about buying like the next year
spreadsheets
>> they're not just spreadsheets you know
there's reports there's API access to
the data there's a lot of data but
anyways you know I think
>> do you see what I mean like it's like
it's not about some crazy singularity
thing it's about like oh do you buy the
memory crunch
>> a simple one though is like you you only
buy the memory crunch if you believe AI
is going to take off in in a huge way.
And um
the memory crunch a lot of it was
predicated on like you know at least for
like people in the Bay Area who think
about infrastructure it's like obvious
KV cache explodes as context lenses go
longer so you need more memory and then
you do the math and you then and you
also have to have a lot of supply chain
understanding of like what fabs are
being built and what data centers are
being built and how many chips and all
these things and so we we we we track
all these different data sets like very
tightly but at the end of the day it
takes you know someone to fully believe
that this is going to happen like I I
think a year ago if you told someone
memory prices will quadruple and
smartphone volumes are going to go down
40%. Um you know over the over the year
or two after that people were like
you're crazy that never happened except
a few people do believe that and those
people did trade memory right and and
and people did I don't think like
Leopold is the only person buying like
memory companies. I think there were a
lot of people buying memory companies.
He of course sized and positioned and
did things in a better ways than some um
may maybe most right. I I don't want to
comment on whose returns are what. Um
but certainly did well. Um but other
people also did really well, right? Um
you're trying to be like this. Wow,
you've made me diplomatic for the first
time [laughter] ever. No, no, you're
fine. You're fine. I think this is
hilarious, right? I'm being a diplomat,
you know, whereas usually I'm like
spicy.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> Okay. Uh maybe some rapid fire uh to
close out. Um can TSMC if you're saying
look the the memory logic, etc. Uh the
N3 is mostly going to be AI
accelerators, but then there's N2, which
is mostly Apple now. And then in the
future, I guess AI would also want to go
on N2. Can
can they kick out Apple if Nvidia and
Amazon and Google say, "Hey, we really
we're willing to pay a lot of money for
N2 capacity."
>> So I think the challenge with this is
chip design timelines take a long while.
And so that's more than a year and the
designs that are on 2nmter are more than
a year out.
>> Yeah.
>> And so what would really happen is Apple
or sorry Nvidia and all these others
will be like, "Hey, we're going to
prepay for the capacity and you're going
to expand it for us." And then Apple
would be and and maybe TSMC takes a
little bit of margin but not a ton.
They're not going to kick Apple out
entirely, right? What they're going to
do is when Apple orders X, they may say,
"Hey, we project you only need Y or XUS
one." And so that's what we're going to
give you is X - one. and then that flex
capacity Apple's kind of screwed on. Um
whereas traditionally Apple's always
overordered by like 10% and cut back by
10% over the course of the year and some
years they they hit the entire 10% just
you know volumes vary right based on the
season and macro blah blah blah blah
blah. Um
>> and so I don't think TSMC would kick out
Apple. I think Apple will become a
smaller and smaller and smaller
percentage of TSMC's revenue and
therefore be less relevant for TSMC to
cater to their demands. and TSMC could
eventually start saying, "Hey, you got
to pre-book your capacity for next year
for two years out and you have to prepay
for the capex because that's what Nvidia
and Amazon and Google are doing."
>> Yeah. I I wonder if it's worth going to
specific numbers on like I I don't have
any of them on hand of like how many N2
wafers uh or what percentage of N2 does
Apple have its hands on versus over the
coming years versus AI?
>> Yeah, I mean this year Apple has the
majority of N2 that's going to get
fabricated. There's a little bit from
AMD. They are trying to make some AI
chips and CPU chips early. There's a
little bit, but for the most part, it's
it's Apple. Um, and as we go forward to
the year after that, Apple still, you
know, gets closer to like half of it as
other people start ramping, but then it
it falls dra drastically, right? Just
like for N3, they were half. Um, we'll
we'll we'll see and and when I say N2,
that includes A16, which is a variant of
N2. Um
over time those those nodes will be the
majority. And what's also interesting is
traditionally Apple's been the first to
a process node. 2nm is actually the
first time they're not. Well besides
Huawei, right? Huawei back in 2020 and
before was the first with Apple, but
they were both making smartphones. Now
with 2nmter, uh you've got AMD trying to
make a CPU and a GPU chiplet that they
used advanced packaging to package
together um in the same time frame as
Apple. Um, and this is a big risk for
AMD that causes potential delays
potentially because it's a brand new
process technology. It's hard. But at
the end of the day, this is this is a
bet that they want to do to, you know,
scale faster than Nvidia and try and
beat them.
>> As we move forward, actually, when we
move to the A16 node, the first customer
there is not even Apple. It's AI. And as
we move forward, that will become more
and more prevalent. Not only will Apple
not be the first to a node, they will
also not be the majority of the volume
to the new node. and then they'll just
be like any old customer and because the
scale of TSMC's capex keeps ballooning
but Apple's business is kind of not
growing at the same pace they become a
less and less relevant customer and they
also will just cut their orders because
things in the supply chain are kicking
them out whether it be uh packaging or
materials or DRAM or NAND these things
are increasing in cost they can't pass
on all the cost to customers likely
because the consumer is not that strong
and and you end up with like this
conundrum where they are just not Apple
TSMC's best bud like they have been
historically.
>> Do you think um if Huawei had access to
3nmter they would have a better
accelerator than Reuben?
>> Potentially. Yeah. I think I think
Huawei they were the first with a 7
nanometer AI chip as well. They were the
first with a 5nmter mobile chip but they
were the first with a 7m AI chip. Uh the
the Huawei Ascend was like two months
before the TPU and like four months
before um Nvidia's I want to say was it
V100 or A100? A100 I think. And so, you
know, I mean, that's just moving to a
process. No, that doesn't imply uh
software. It doesn't imply hardware
design, all these other things. But
Huawei is arguably the only company in
the world that has all the legs, right?
Huawei has cracked software engineers.
Huawei has cracked networking
technologies. That's in fact their
biggest business historically, right?
And they have cracked AI uh talent. Um
but furthermore, beyond Nvidia, they
actually have better AI researchers. And
furthermore, beyond Nvidia, they have
their own fabs. And furthermore, beyond
Nvidia, they have, you know, their own,
you know, end market of like selling
tokens and things like that. And Huawei
tends to be like they're able to get the
top top top talent. Nvidia is as well,
but not as not as in and much
concentration. And Huawei has a bigger
pool in China. It's very arguable that
Huawei, if they had TSMC, would be
better than Nvidia. And there are areas
where China has advantages outside of um
in areas that Nvidia can't access as
easily, right? Around not just scale,
but also like some things around um
tech, you know, certain optical
technologies China's actually really
good at. Um, so there's there's certain
I think it's very reasonable that if uh
in 2019 that issue that that was not
that Huawei was not banned from using
TSMC,
Huawei would Huawei had already eclipsed
Apple as the biggest TSMC customer and
Huawei has huge share in networking and
compute and CPUs and all these things.
They would have kept gaining share and
they'd likely be TSMC's bigger biggest
customer.
>> Wow, that's crazy. U I've got a kind of
a random final question for you. So the
other part of the Elon interview was
robots. And so if um if humanoids take
off faster than people expect, if by
2030 there's millions of humanoids
running around which each need local uh
local compute
any thoughts on what that implies, what
would be required for that? you know
there's there's a lot of like
difficulties with like the VLMs and all
these things that people VALAS that
people are deploying on on robots
but to some extent you don't need to
have all the intelligence in the robot
um and it would be much more efficient
to not do that right because in the
server in in in cloud you can batch
process and all these things so what you
may want to do is hey a lot of the
planning and longer horizon tasks are
determined by a much more capable model
in the cloud that runs at very high
batch sizes is and then it pushes those
directions to the robots who then
interpolate between each subsequent
action or is given like hey pick up that
cup and then the model on the robot can
pick up the cup and it's like as it's
picking up it's like oh you know in fact
this you know you know things like
weight and all these things might have
to be and like force may have to be like
determined by the model on the robot but
not everything needs to be like you know
hey pick up the ro uh you know this
right or like hey that's a headphone
actually I'm the supermodel in the cloud
I know that this headphones are, you
know, Sony XM6s, which is not a dorkish
ad spot, but you know,
>> like, why [laughter] is this guy
plugging this thing so hard? It's like
on the table. It's like on his neck when
we're entering Satia together. Like,
[laughter] is he getting paid by Sony?
>> Um, unfortunately not. Unfortunately
not. But anyways, like you know, it
might say, "Hey, the headband is soft
and and this is the gr this is the
weight of it and all these things." And
then the model on the robot can be less
intelligent and take these inputs and do
the actions and it may get told by the
model in the cloud every second every 10
times a second maybe you know it depends
on the hertz of the action but a lot of
that can be offloaded to the cloud
because otherwise if you do all of the
processing on the device I believe it
would be more expensive because you
can't batch two you couldn't have as
much intelligence as you do in the cloud
because the models will just be bigger
in the cloud and three we're in a
semiconductor shortage world and any
robot you deploy needs leading edge
chips because the power is really bad
for robots, right? You need it to be low
power and efficient and all of a sudden
you're taking power and chips that would
have been for AI data centers and you're
putting them in robots.
>> Yeah.
>> So now that 200 gawatt gets lower if
you're at if you're deploying millions
of humanoids. I I I think this this is
very interesting because something
people might not appreciate about the
future is how centralized in a physical
sense intelligence will be where right
now with humans your computer like
there's 8 billion humans and their
compute is on on their heads on their
person and in the future even with
robots that are out of physically in the
world I mean obviously knowledge work
will be done in a centralized way from
data centers with huge like hundreds of
thousands of instances or maybe millions
of instances but even for robotics the
future you're suggesting is um one where
there's like more centralized thinking
and centralized computation that's
driving you know millions of robots out
in the world. Um and so I think that's
just like yeah that's that's an
interesting fact about the future that I
think people might not appreciate.
>> I I think Elon recognizes this which is
why he's like going to different places
for his chips, right? He signed this
massive deal with Samsung to make his
robot ships in Texas because he thinks,
you know, like I I I personally think he
thinks that, you know, Taiwan risk is
huge. And because of that and the
centralization of resources in Taiwan,
him having his robot chips in Texas and
also being a separate supply chain that
is not as constrained by no one's making
AI chips really on Samsung besides uh
Nvidia's new uh LPU that they're
launched uh they're launching it next
week, but we're recording it the week
before.
>> It's coming out this week. This this
episode coming out Friday.
>> Oh, this episode's coming out before.
Sick. So, they're launching this new AI
chip um next week for which is built on
Samsung, but that's like sort of a
recent development from Nvidia. And then
that's the only other AI like AI demand
there. Whereas on TSMC, everything is
competing. So, he gets this like both
geopolitical diversification, but also
uh supply chain diversity for his
robots. and he's not as competing as
much with with the like willingness to
pay of infinity of the data center of
geniuses.
>> Okay, final question. um on Taiwan.
If we believe that tools are the
ultimate bottleneck,
how much of Taiwan's
uh uh place in the AS semiconductor
supply chain could we de-risk simply by
having a plan to airlift every single
process engineer at TSMC out when things
come to if they get blockaded or
something? Or do you actually still need
to ship out the EUV tools uh which would
be multiple plane loads per single tool
and would not be practical? If you ship
out all the process engineers and
assuming it's like hot enough that you
destroy the fabs, no one has all the
fabs in Taiwan now, uh, which is a big
risk, right? Um,
>> you know, these tools actually use a lot
of semiconductors which are manufactured
in Taiwan. So, it's like a it's like a,
you know, a snake eating its own tail
sort of like meme because you can't make
the tools without the chips from Taiwan,
which you can't use without the tools in
Taiw. you know, there's obviously some
diversification there, but and and they
don't use super advanced to uh chips in
lithography tools, but at the end of the
day, there is some tail eating the
dragon. Um, just shipping out all the
engineers and blowing up the fabs means
China has a stronger semiconductor
supply chain than the rest of the world,
right? in terms of verticalization now
that you've removed Taiwan and
now you've got all the knowhow but
you've got to replicate it in let's say
Arizona um or wherever for TSMC
and it's going to take a long time to
build all the capacity that TSMC has had
built over the years and so you've
drastically slowed US and global GDP not
just growth you've shranked the GDP
massively and you've got a lot bigger
problems uh and your incremental ability
to add compute goes to almost zero,
right? Instead of hundreds of gigawatts
a year by the end of the decade, let's
say by the end of the decade something
happens to Taiwan. Now you're at maybe
like 10 gawatts across Intel and Samsung
or 20 gigawatts. It's like nothing,
right?
>> Um but now all of a sudden you've like
really caused some crazy dynamics in AI.
Uh of course you have all the existing
capacity, but that existing capacity
pales in comparison to the capacity
that's being expanded.
>> Yeah. Okay, Dylan, that was excellent.
Thank you so much for coming on the
podcast.
>> Thank you for having me. And uh see see
you tonight. Yes. [laughter]